THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN LAND
ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ACT, 2013
–––––––––––––––
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
––––––––––––––––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DETERMINATION OF SOCIAL IMPACT AND PUBLIC PURPOSE
A.—PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION FOR DETERMINATION OF SOCIAL IMPACT AND PUBLIC
PURPOSE
4. Preparation of Social Impact Assessment study.
5. Public hearing for Social Impact Assessment.
6. Publication of Social Impact Assessment study.
B.—APPRAISAL OF SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT BY AN EXPERT GROUP
7. Appraisal of Social Impact Assessment report by an Expert Group.
8. Examination of proposals for land acquisition and Social Impact Assessment report by
appropriate Government.
9. Exemption from Social Impact Assessment.
CHAPTER III
SPECIAL PROVISION TO SAFEGUARD FOOD SECURITY
10. Special provision to safeguard food security.
CHAPTER IV
NOTIFICATION AND ACQUISITION
11. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers thereupon.
12. Preliminary survey of land and power of officers to carry out survey.
13. Payment for damage.
14. Lapse of Social Impact Assessment report.
15. Hearing of objections.

1

SECTIONS
16. Preparation of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme by the Administrator.
17. Review of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme.
18. Approved Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme to be made public.
19. Publication of declaration and summary of Rehabilitation and Resettlement.
20. Land to be marked out, measured and planned including marking of specific areas.
21. Notice to persons interested.
22. Power to require and enforce the making of statements as to names and interests.
23. Enquiry and land acquisition award by Collector.
24. Land acquisition process under Act No. 1 of 1984 shall be deemed to have lapsed in certain
cases.
25. Period within which an award shall be made.
26. Determination of market value of land by Collector.
27. Determination of amount of compensation.
28. Parameters to be considered by Collector in determination of award.
29. Determination of value of things attached to land or building.
30. Award of solatium.
CHAPTER V
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT AWARD
31. Rehabilitation and Resettlement Award for affected families by Collector.
32. Provision of infrastructural amenities in resettlement area.
33. Corrections to awards by Collector.
34. Adjournment of enquiry.
35. Power to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses and production of documents.
36. Power to call for records, etc.
37. Awards of Collector when to be final.
38. Power to take possession of land to be acquired.
39. Additional compensation in case of multiple displacements.
40. Special powers in case of urgency to acquire land in certain cases.
41. Special provisions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
42. Reservation and other benefits.
CHAPTER VI
PROCEDURE AND MANNER OF REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
43. Appointment of Administrator.
44. Commissioner for rehabilitation and resettlement.
45. Rehabilitation and resettlement committee at project level.

2

SECTIONS
46. Provisions relating to rehabilitation and resettlement to apply in case of certain persons other
than specified persons.
47. Quantification and deposit of rehabilitation and resettlement amount.
CHAPTER VII
NATIONAL MONITORING COMMITTEE FOR REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
48. Establishment of National Monitoring Committee for rehabilitation and resettlement.
49. Reporting requirements.
50. Establishment of State Monitoring Committee for rehabilitation and resettlement.
CHAPTER VIII
ESTABLISHMENT OF LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT AUTHORITY
51. Establishment of Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority.
52. Composition of Authority.
53. Qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officer.
54. Terms of office of Presiding Officer.
55. Staff of Authority.
56. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officers.
57. Filling up of vacancies.
58. Resignation and removal.
59. Orders constituting Authority to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.
60. Powers of Authority and procedure before it.
61. Proceedings before Authority to be judicial proceedings.
62. Members and officers of Authority to be public servants.
63. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.
64. Reference to Authority.
65. Collector‘s statement to Authority.
66. Service of notice by Authority.
67. Restriction on scope of proceedings.
68. Proceedings to be in public.
69. Determination of award by Authority.
70. Form of award.
71. Costs.
72. Collector may be directed to pay interest on excess compensation.
73. Re-determination of amount of compensation on the basis of the award of the Authority.
74. Appeal to High Court.

3

CHAPTER IX
APPORTIONMENT OF COMPENSATION
SECTIONS
75. Particulars of apportionment to be specified.
76. Dispute as to apportionment.
CHAPTER X
PAYMENT
77. Payment of compensation or deposit of same in Authority.
78. Investment of money deposited in respect of lands belonging to person incompetent to
alienate.
79. Investment of money deposited in other cases.
80. Payment of interest.
CHAPTER XI
TEMPORARY OCCUPATION OF LAND
81. Temporary occupation of waste or arable land, procedure when difference as to
compensation exists.
82. Power to enter and take possession and compensation on restoration.
83. Difference as to condition of land.
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
84. Punishment for false information, mala fide action, etc.
85. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act.
86. Offences by companies.
87. Offences by Government departments.
88. Cognizance of offences by court.
89. Offences to be non-cognizable.
90. Offences to be cognizable only on complaint filed by certain persons.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
91. Magistrate to enforce surrender.
92. Service of notice.
93. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not
completed.
94. Acquisition of part of house or building.
95. Acquisition of land at cost of a local authority or Requiring Body.
96. Exemption from income-tax, stamp duty and fees.

4

SECTIONS
97. Acceptance of certified copy as evidence.
98. Notice in case of suits for anything done in pursuance of Act.
99. No change of purpose to be allowed.
100. No change of ownership without permission to be allowed.
101. Return of unutilised land.
102. Difference in price of land when transferred for higher consideration to be shared.
103. Provisions to be in addition to existing laws.
104. Option of appropriate Government to lease.
105. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases or to apply with certain modifications.
106. Power to amend Schedule.
107. Power of State Legislatures to enact any law more beneficial to affected families.
108. Option to affected families to avail better compensation and rehabilitation and resettlement.
109. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.
110. Rules made by Central Government to be laid before Parliament.
111. Rules made by State Government to be laid before State Legislature.
112. Previous publication of rules made by Central and State Government.
113. Power to remove difficulties.
114. Repeal and saving.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.

5

THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN LAND
ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ACT, 2013
ACT No. 30 OF 2013
[26th September, 2013.]

An Act to ensure, in consultation with institutions of local self-government and Gram Sabhas
established under the Constitution, a humane, participative, informed and transparent
process for land acquisition for industrialisation, development of essential infrastructural
facilities and urbanisation with the least disturbance to the owners of the land and other
affected families and provide just and fair compensation to the affected families whose
land has been acquired or proposed to be acquired or are affected by such acquisition and
make adequate provisions for such affected persons for their rehabilitation and
resettlement and for ensuring that the cumulative outcome of compulsory acquisition
should be that affected persons become partners in development leading to an
improvement in their post acquisition social and economic status and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.–(1) This Act may be called the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that the Central Government shall appoint such date within three months from the date
on which the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2013 receives the assent of the President.
2. Application of Act.–(1) The provisions of this Act relating to land acquisition, compensation,
rehabilitation and resettlement, shall apply, when the appropriate Government acquires land for its
own use, hold and control, including for Public Sector Undertakings and for public purpose, and shall
include the following purposes, namely:—
(a) for strategic purposes relating to naval, military, air force, and armed forces of the Union,
including central paramilitary forces or any work vital to national security or defence of India or
State police, safety of the people; or
(b) for infrastructure projects, which includes the following, namely:—
(i) all activities or items listed in the notification of the Government of India in the
Department of Economic Affairs (Infrastructure Section) number 13/6/2009-INF, dated the
27th March, 2012, excluding private hospitals, private educational institutions and private
hotels;
(ii) projects involving agro-processing, supply of inputs to agriculture, warehousing, cold
storage facilities, marketing infrastructure for agriculture and allied activities such as dairy,
fisheries, and meat processing, set up or owned by the appropriate Government or by a
farmers' cooperative or by an institution set up under a statute;
(iii) project for industrial corridors or mining activities, national investment and
1. 1st January 2014, vide notification No. 3729 (E), dated 19th December, 2013, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,
sec. 3(ii).

6

manufacturing zones, as designated in the National Manufacturing Policy;
(iv) project for water harvesting and water conservation structures, sanitation;
(v) project for Government administered, Government aided educational and research
schemes or institutions;
(vi) project for sports, health care, tourism, transportation or space programme;
(vii) any infrastructure facility as may be notified in this regard by the Central Government
and after tabling of such notification in Parliament;
(c) project for project affected families;
(d) project for housing for such income groups, as may be specified from time to time by the
appropriate Government;
(e) project for planned development or the improvement of village sites or any site in the urban
areas or provision of land for residential purposes for the weaker sections in rural and urban areas;
(f) project for residential purposes to the poor or landless or to persons residing in areas
affected by natural calamities, or to persons displaced or affected by reason of the implementation
of any scheme undertaken by the Government, any local authority or a corporation owned or
controlled by the State.
(2) The provisions of this Act relating to land acquisition, consent, compensation, rehabilitation
and resettlement, shall also apply, when the appropriate Government acquires land for the following
purposes, namely:—
(a) for public private partnership projects, where the ownership of the land continues to vest
with the Government, for public purpose as defined in sub-section (1);
(b) for private companies for public purpose, as defined in sub-section (1):
Provided that in the case of acquisition for—
(i) private companies, the prior consent of at least eighty per cent, of those affected
families, as defined in sub-clauses (i) and (v) of clause (c) of section 3; and
(ii) public private partnership projects, the prior consent of at least seventy per cent. of
those affected families, as defined in sub-clauses (i) and (v) of clause (c) of section 3,
shall be obtained through a process as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government:
Provided further that the process of obtaining the consent shall be carried out along with the Social
Impact Assessment study referred to in section 4:
Provided also that no land shall be transferred by way of acquisition, in the Scheduled Areas in
contravention of any law (including any order or judgment of a court which has become final) relating
to land transfer, prevailing in such Scheduled Areas.
(3) The provisions relating to rehabilitation and resettlement under this Act shall apply in the cases
where,—
(a) a private company purchases land, equal to or more than such limits in rural areas or urban
areas, as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, through private negotiations with the
owner of the land in accordance with the provisions of section 46;
(b) a private company requests the appropriate Government for acquisition of a part of an area
so prescribed for a public purpose:
Provided that where a private company requests the appropriate Government for partial
acquisition of land for public purpose, then, the rehabilitation and resettlement entitlements under
the Second Schedule shall be applicable for the entire area which includes the land purchased by
the private company and acquired by the Government for the project as a whole.

7

3. Definition.–In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ―Administrator‖ means an officer appointed for the purpose of rehabilitation and
resettlement of affected families under sub-section (1) of section 43;
(b) ―affected area‖ means such area as may be notified by the appropriate Government for the
purposes of land acquisition;
(c) ―affected family‖ includes—
(i) a family whose land or other immovable property has been acquired;
(ii) a family which does not own any land but a member or members of such family may
be agricultural labourers, tenants including any form of tenancy or holding of usufruct right,
share-croppers or artisans or who may be working in the affected area for three years prior to
the acquisition of the land, whose primary source of livelihood stand affected by the
acquisition of land;
(iii) the Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who have lost any of their
forest rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007) due to acquisition of land;
(iv) family whose primary source of livelihood for three years prior to the acquisition of
the land is dependent on forests or water bodies and includes gatherers of forest produce,
hunters, fisher folk and boatmen and such livelihood is affected due to acquisition of land;
(v) a member of the family who has been assigned land by the State Government or the
Central Government under any of its schemes and such land is under acquisition;
(vi) a family residing on any land in the urban areas for preceding three years or more
prior to the acquisition of the land or whose primary source of livelihood for three years prior
to the acquisition of the land is affected by the acquisition of such land;
(d) ―agricultural land‖ means land used for the purpose of—
(i) agriculture or horticulture;
(ii) dairy farming, poultry farming, pisciculture, sericulture, seed farming breeding of
livestock or nursery growing medicinal herbs;
(iii) raising of crops, trees, grass or garden produce; and
(iv) land used for the grazing of cattle;
(e) ―appropriate Government‖ means,—
(i) in relation to acquisition of land situated within the territory of, a State, the State
Government;
(ii) in relation to acquisition of land situated within a Union territory (except Puducherry),
the Central Government;
(iii) in relation to acquisition of land situated within the Union territory of Puducherry, the
Government of Union territory of Puducherry;
(iv) in relation to acquisition of land for public purpose in more than one State, the Central
Government, in consultation with the concerned State Governments or Union territories; and
(v) in relation to the acquisition of land for the purpose of the Union as may be specified
by notification, the Central Government:
Provided that in respect of a public purpose in a District for an area not exceeding such as
may be notified by the appropriate Government, the Collector of such District shall be deemed
to be the appropriate Government;
(f) ―Authority‖ means the Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority
established under section 51;

8

(g) ―Collector‖ means the Collector of a revenue district, and includes a Deputy Commissioner
and any officer specially designated by the appropriate Government to perform the functions of a
Collector under this Act;
(h) ―Commissioner‖ means the Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Resettlement appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 44;
(i) ―cost of acquisition‖ includes—
(i) amount of compensation which includes solatium, any enhanced compensation ordered
by the Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority or the Court and
interest payable thereon and any other amount determined as payable to the affected families
by such Authority or Court;
(ii) demurrage to be paid for damages caused to the land and standing crops in the process
of acquisition;
(iii) cost of acquisition of land and building for settlement of displaced or adversely
affected families;
(iv) cost of development of infrastructure and amenities at the resettlement areas;
(v) cost of rehabilitation and resettlement as determined in accordance with the provisions
of this Act;
(vi) administrative cost,—
(A) for acquisition of land, including both in the project site and out of project area
lands, not exceeding such percentage of the cost of compensation as may be specified by
the appropriate Government;
(B) for rehabilitation and resettlement of the owners of the land and other affected
families whose land has been acquired or proposed to be acquired or other families
affected by such acquisition;
(vii) cost of undertaking ‗Social impact Assessment study‘;
(j) ―company‖ means—
(i) a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) other than a
Government company;
(ii) a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or under
any corresponding law for the time being in force in a State;
(k) ―displaced family‖ means any family, who on account of acquisition of land has to be
relocated and resettled from the affected area to the resettlement area;
(l) ―entitled to act‖, in relation to a person, shall be deemed to include the following persons,
namely:—
(i) trustees for other persons beneficially interested with reference to any such case, and
that to the same extent as the person beneficially interested could have acted if free from
disability;
(ii) the guardians of minors and the committees or managers of lunatics to the same extent
as the minors, lunatics or other persons of unsound mind themselves, if free from disability,
could have acted:
Provided that the provisions of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in the case of persons interested
appearing before a Collector or Authority by a next friend, or by a guardian for the case, in
proceedings under this Act;
(m) ―family‖ includes a person, his or her spouse, minor children, minor brothers and minor
sisters dependent on him:

9

Provided that widows, divorcees and women deserted by families shall be considered separate
families.
Explanation.—An adult of either gender with or without spouse or children or dependents
shall be considered as a separate family for the purposes of this Act;
(n) ―holding of land‖ means the total land held by a person as an owner, occupant or tenant or
otherwise;
(o) "infrastructure project" shall include any one or more of the items specified in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 2;
(p) ―land‖ includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently
fastened to anything attached to the earth;
(q) ―landless‖ means such persons or class of persons who may be,—
(i) considered or specified as such under any State law for the time being in force; or
(ii) in a case of landless not being specified under sub-clause (i), as may be specified by
the appropriate Government;
(r) ―land owner‖ includes any person,—
(i) whose name is recorded as the owner of the land or building or part thereof, in the
records of the authority concerned; or
(ii) any person who is granted forest rights under the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007) or under any
other law for the time being in force; or
(iii) who is entitled to be granted Patta rights on the land under any law of the State
including assigned lands; or
(iv) any person who has been declared as such by an order of the court or Authority;
(s) ―local authority‖ includes a town planning authority (by whatever name called) set up
under any law for the time being in force, a Panchayat as defined in article 243 and a Municipality
as defined in article 243P, of the Constitution;
(t) ―marginal farmer‖ means a cultivator with an un-irrigated land holding up to one hectare or
irrigated land holding up to one-half hectare;
(u) ―market value‖ means the value of land determined in accordance with section 26;
(v) ―notification‖ means a notification published in the Gazette of India or, as the case may be,
the Gazette of a State and the expression ―notify‖ shall be construed accordingly;
(w) ―patta‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the relevant Central or State Acts
or rules or regulations made thereunder;
(x) ―person interested‖ means—
(i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of the
acquisition of land under this Act;
(ii) the Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers, who have lost any forest
rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007);
(iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land;
(iv) persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws including share-croppers
by whatever name they may be called; and
(v) any person whose primary source of livelihood is likely to be adversely affected;
(y) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

10

(z) ―project‖ means a project for which land is being acquired, irrespective of the number of
persons affected;
(za) ―public purpose‖ means the activities specified under sub-section (1) of section 2;
(zb) ―Requiring Body‖ means a company, a body corporate, an institution, or any other
organisation or person for whom land is to be acquired by the appropriate Government, and
includes the appropriate Government, if the acquisition of land is for such Government either for
its own use or for subsequent transfer of such land is for public purpose to a company, body
corporate, an institution, or any other organisation, as the case may be, under lease, licence or
through any other mode of transfer of land;
(zc) ―Resettlement Area‖ means an area where the affected families who have been displaced
as a result of land acquisition are resettled by the appropriate Government;
(zd) "Scheduled Areas" means the Scheduled Areas as defined in section 2 of the Provisions of
the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (40 of 1996);
(ze) ―small farmer‖ means a cultivator with an un-irrigated land holding up to two hectares or
with an irrigated land holding up to one hectare, but more than the holding of a marginal farmer.
CHAPTER II
DETERMINATION OF SOCIAL IMPACT AND PUBLIC PURPOSE
A.—PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION FOR DETERMINATION OF SOCIAL IMPACT AND
PUBLIC PURPOSE
4. Preparation of Social Impact Assessment study.–(1) Whenever the appropriate Government
intends to acquire land for a public purpose, it shall consult the concerned Panchayat, Municipality or
Municipal Corporation, as the case may be, at village level or ward level, in the affected area and carry
out a Social Impact Assessment study in consultation with them, in such manner and from such date as
may be specified by such Government by notification.
(2) The notification issued by the appropriate Government for commencement of consultation and
of the Social Impact Assessment study under sub-section (1) shall be made available in the local
language to the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case may be, and in the
offices of the District Collector, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil, and shall be published
in the affected areas, in such manner as may be prescribed, and uploaded on the website of the
appropriate Government:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall ensure that adequate representation has been given
to the representatives of Panchayat, Gram Sabha, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case
may be, at the stage of carrying out the Social Impact Assessment study:
Provided further that the appropriate Government shall ensure the completion of the Social Impact
Assessment study within a period of six months from the date of its commencement.
(3) The Social Impact Assessment study report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made
available to the public in the manner prescribed under section 6.
(4) The Social Impact Assessment study referred to in sub-section (1) shall, amongst other matters,
include all the following, namely:—
(a) assessment as to whether the proposed acquisition serves public purpose;
(b) estimation of affected families and the number of families among them likely to be
displaced;
(c) extent of lands, public and private, houses, settlements and other common properties likely
to be affected by the proposed acquisition;
(d) whether the extent of land proposed for acquisition is the absolute bare- minimum extent
needed for the project;

11

(e) whether land acquisition at an alternate place has been considered and found not feasible;
(f) study of social impacts of the project, and the nature and cost of addressing them and the
impact of these costs on the overall costs of the project vis-a-vis the benefits of the project:
Provided that Environmental Impact Assessment study, if any, shall be carried out simultaneously
and shall not be contingent upon the completion of the Social Impact Assessment study.
(5) While undertaking a Social Impact Assessment study under sub-section (1), the appropriate
Government shall, amongst other things, take into consideration the impact that the project is likely to
have on various components such as livelihood of affected families, public and community properties,
assets and infrastructure particularly roads, public transport, drainage, sanitation, sources of drinking
water, sources of water for cattle, community ponds, grazing land, plantations, public utilities such as
post offices, fair price shops, food storage godowns, electricity supply, health care facilities, schools
and educational or training facilities, anganwadis, children parks, places of worship, land for
traditional tribal institutions and burial and cremation grounds.
(6) The appropriate Government shall require the authority conducting the Social Impact
Assessment study to prepare a Social Impact Management Plan, listing the ameliorative measures
required to be undertaken for addressing the impact for a specific component referred to in sub-section
(5), and such measures shall not be less than what is provided under a scheme or programme, in
operation in that area, of the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, in
operation in the affected area.
5. Public hearing for Social Impact Assessment.–Whenever a Social Impact Assessment is
required to be prepared under section 4, the appropriate Government shall ensure that a public hearing
is held at the affected area, after giving adequate publicity about the date, time and venue for the public
hearing, to ascertain the views of the affected families to be recorded and included in the Social Impact
Assessment Report.
6. Publication of Social Impact Assessment study.–(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure
that the Social Impact Assessment study report and the Social Impact Management Plan referred to in
sub-section (6) of section 4 are prepared and made available in the local language to the Panchayat,
Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case may be, and the offices of the District Collector,
the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil, and shall be published in the affected areas, in such
manner as may be prescribed, and uploaded on the website of the appropriate Government.
(2) Wherever Environment Impact Assessment is carried out, a copy of the Social Impact
Assessment report shall be made available to the Impact Assessment Agency authorised by the Central
Government to carry out environmental impact assessment:
Provided that, in respect of irrigation projects where the process of Environment Impact
Assessment is required under the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, the provisions
of this Act relating to Social Impact Assessment shall not apply.
B.—APPRAISAL OF SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT BY AN EXPERT GROUP
7. Appraisal of Social Impact Assessment report by an Expert Group.–(1) The appropriate
Government shall ensure that the Social Impact Assessment report is evaluated by an independent
multi-disciplinary Expert Group, as may be constituted by it.
(2) The Expert Group constituted under sub-section (1) shall include the following, namely:—
(a) two non-official social scientists;
(b) two representatives of Panchayat, Gram Sabha, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as
the case may be;
(c) two experts on rehabilitation; and
(d) a technical expert in the subject relating to the project.
(3) The appropriate Government may nominate a person from amongst the members of the Expert
Group as the Chairperson of the Group.

12

(4) If the Expert Group constituted under sub-section (1), is of the opinion that,—
(a) the project does not serve any public purpose; or
(b) the social costs and adverse social impacts of the project outweigh the potential benefits,
it shall make a recommendation within two months from the date of its constitution to the effect that
the project shall be abandoned forthwith and no further steps to acquire the land will be initiated in
respect of the same:
Provided that the grounds for such recommendation shall be recorded in writing by the Expert
Group giving the details and reasons for such decision:
Provided further that where the appropriate Government, inspite of such recommendations,
proceeds with the acquisition, then, it shall ensure that its reasons for doing so are recorded in writing.
(5) If the Expert Group constituted under sub-section (1), is of the opinion that,—
(a) the project will serve any public purpose; and
(b) the potential benefits outweigh the social costs and adverse social impacts,
it shall make specific recommendations within two months from the date of its constitution whether
the extent of land proposed to be acquired is the absolute bare-minimum extent needed for the project
and whether there are no other less displacing options available:
Provided that the grounds for such recommendation shall be recorded in writing by the Expert
Group giving the details and reasons for such decision.
(6) The recommendations of the Expert Group referred to in sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be made
available in the local language to the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case
may be, and the offices of the District Collector, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil, and
shall be published in the affected areas, in such manner as may be prescribed and uploaded on the
website of the appropriate Government.
8. Examination of proposals for land acquisition and Social Impact Assessment report by
appropriate Government.–(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that—
(a) there is a legitimate and bona fide public purpose for the proposed acquisition which
necessitates the acquisition of the land identified;
(b) the potential benefits and the public purpose referred to in clause (a) shall outweigh the
social costs and adverse social impact as determined by the Social Impact Assessment that has
been carried out;
(c) only the minimum area of land required for the project is proposed to be acquired;
(d) there is no unutilised land which has been previously acquired in the area;
(e) the land, if any, acquired earlier and remained unutilised, is used for such public purpose
and make recommendations in respect thereof.
(2) The appropriate Government shall examine the report of the Collector, if any, and the report of
the Expert Group on the Social Impact Assessment study and after considering all the reports,
recommend such area for acquisition which would ensure minimum displacement of people, minimum
disturbance to the infrastructure, ecology and minimum adverse impact on the individuals affected.
(3) The decision of the appropriate Government shall be made available in the local language to
the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case may be, and the offices of the
District Collector, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil, and shall be published in the affected
areas, in such manner as may be prescribed, and uploaded on the website of the appropriate
Government:
Provided that where land is sought to be acquired for the purposes as specified in sub-section (2)
of section 2, the appropriate Government shall also ascertain as to whether the prior consent of the
affected families as required under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 2, has been obtained in the
manner as may be prescribed.

13

9. Exemption from Social Impact Assessment.–Where land is proposed to be acquired invoking
the urgency provisions under section 40, the appropriate Government may exempt undertaking of the
Social Impact Assessment study.
CHAPTER III
SPECIAL PROVISION TO SAFEGUARD FOOD SECURITY
10. Special provision to safeguard food security.–(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section
(2), no irrigated multi-cropped land shall be acquired under this Act.
(2) Such land may be acquired subject to the condition that it is being done under exceptional
circumstances, as a demonstrable last resort, where the acquisition of the land referred to in subsection (1) shall, in aggregate for all projects in a district or State, in no case exceed such limits as may
be notified by the appropriate Government considering the relevant State specific factors and
circumstances.
(3) Whenever multi-crop irrigated land is acquired under sub-section (2), an equivalent area of
culturable wasteland shall be developed for agricultural purposes or an amount equivalent to the value
of the land acquired shall be deposited with the appropriate Government for investment in agriculture
for enhancing food-security.
(4) In a case not falling under sub-section (1), the acquisition of the agricultural land in aggregate
for all projects in a district or State, shall in no case exceed such limits of the total net sown area of
that district or State, as may be notified by the appropriate Government:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the case of projects that are linear in
nature such as those relating to railways, highways, major district roads, irrigation canals, power lines
and the like.
CHAPTER IV
NOTIFICATION AND ACQUISITION
11. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers.–(1) Whenever, it appears to
the appropriate Government that land in any area is required or likely to be required for any public
purpose, a notification (hereinafter referred to as preliminary notification) to that effect along with
details of the land to be acquired in rural and urban areas shall be published in the following manner,
namely:—
(a) in the Official Gazette;
(b) in two daily newspapers circulating in the locality of such area of which one shall be in the
regional language;
(c) in the local language in the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case
may be and in the offices of the District Collector, the Sub-divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil;
(d) uploaded on the website of the appropriate Government;
(e) in the affected areas, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Immediately after issuance of the notification under sub-section (1), the concerned Gram Sabha
or Sabhas at the village level, municipalities in case of municipal areas and the Autonomous Councils
in case of the areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, shall be informed of the
contents of the notification issued under the said sub-section in all cases of land acquisition at a
meeting called especially for this purpose.
(3) The notification issued under sub-section (1) shall also contain a statement on the nature of the
public purpose involved, reasons necessitating the displacement of affected persons, summary of the
Social Impact Assessment Report and particulars of the Administrator appointed for the purposes of
rehabilitation and resettlement under section 43.
(4) No person shall make any transaction or cause any transaction of land specified in the
preliminary notification or create any encumbrances on such land from the date of publication of such

14

notification till such time as the proceedings under this Chapter are completed:
Provided that the Collector may, on the application made by the owner of the land so notified,
exempt in special circumstances to be recorded in writing, such owner from the operation of this subsection:
Provided further that any loss or injury suffered by any person due to his wilful violation of this
provision shall not be made up by the Collector.
(5) After issuance of notice under sub-section (1), the Collector shall, before the issue of a
declaration under section 19, undertake and complete the exercise of updating of land records as
prescribed within a period of two months.
12. Preliminary survey of land and power of officers to carry out survey.–For the purposes of
enabling the appropriate Government to determine the extent of land to be acquired, it shall be lawful
for any officer, either generally or specially authorised by such Government in this behalf, and for his
servants and workmen,—
(a) to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality;
(b) to dig or bore into the sub-soil;
(c) to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is adapted for such purpose;
(d) to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be taken and the intended line of the work
(if any) proposed to be made thereon; and
(e) to mark such levels, boundaries and line by placing marks and cutting trenches and where
otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the levels taken and the boundaries and line marked,
to cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle:
Provided that no act under clauses (a) to (e) in respect of land shall be conducted in the absence of
the owner of the land or in the absence of any person authorised in writing by the owner:
Provided further that the acts specified under the first proviso may be undertaken in the absence of
the owner, if the owner has been afforded a reasonable opportunity to be present during the survey, by
giving a notice of at least sixty days prior to such survey:
Provided also that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or garden
attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously
giving such occupier at least seven days‘ notice in writing of his intention to do so.
13. Payment for damage.–The officer so authorised under section 12 shall at the time of entry
under section 12 pay or tender payment for any damage caused, and, in case of dispute as to the
sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered, he shall at once refer the dispute to the decision of the
Collector or other chief revenue officer of the district, and such decision shall be final.
14. Lapse of Social Impact Assessment report.–Where a preliminary notification under section
11 is not issued within twelve months from the date of appraisal of the Social Impact Assessment
report submitted by the Expert Group under section 7, then, such report shall be deemed to have lapsed
and a fresh Social Impact Assessment shall be required to be undertaken prior to acquisition
proceedings under section 11:
Provided that the appropriate Government, shall have the power to extend the period of twelve
months, if in its opinion circumstances exist justifying the same:
Provided further that any such decision to extend the period shall be recorded in writing and the
same shall be notified and be uploaded on the website of the authority concerned.
15. Hearing of objections.–(1) Any person interested in any land which has been notified under
sub-section (1) of section 11, as being required or likely to be required for a public purpose, may
within sixty days from the date of the publication of the preliminary notification, object to—
(a) the area and suitability of land proposed to be acquired;

15

(b) justification offered for public purpose;
(c) the findings of the Social Impact Assessment report.
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Collector in writing, and the
Collector shall give the objector an opportunity of being heard in person or by any person authorised
by him in this behalf or by an Advocate and shall, after hearing all such objections and after making
such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary, either make a report in respect of the land which
has been notified under sub-section (1) of section 11, or make different reports in respect of different
parcels of such land, to the appropriate Government, containing his recommendations on the
objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him along with a separate report giving
therein the approximate cost of land acquisition, particulars as to the number of affected families likely
to be resettled, for the decision of that Government.
(3) The decision of the appropriate Government on the objections made under sub-section (2) shall
be final.
16. Preparation of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme by the Administrator.–(1) Upon
the publication of the preliminary notification under sub-section (1) of section 11 by the Collector, the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement shall conduct a survey and undertake a census of the
affected families, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed, which shall include—
(a) particulars of lands and immovable properties being acquired of each affected family;
(b) livelihoods lost in respect of land losers and landless whose livelihoods are primarily
dependent on the lands being acquired;
(c) a list of public utilities and Government buildings which are affected or likely to be
affected, where resettlement of affected families is involved;
(d) details of the amenities and infrastructural facilities which are affected or likely to be
affected, where resettlement of affected families is involved; and
(e) details of any common property resources being acquired.
(2) The Administrator shall, based on the survey and census under sub-section (1), prepare a draft
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme, as prescribed which shall include particulars of the
rehabilitation and resettlement entitlements of each land owner and landless whose livelihoods are
primarily dependent on the lands being acquired and where resettlement of affected families is
involved—
(i) a list of Government buildings to be provided in the Resettlement Area;
(ii) details of the public amenities and infrastructural facilities which are to be provided in the
Resettlement Area.
(3) The draft Rehabilitation and Resettlement scheme referred to in sub-section (2) shall include
time limit for implementing Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme.
(4) The draft Rehabilitation and Resettlement scheme referred to in sub-section (2) shall be made
known locally by wide publicity in the affected area and discussed in the concerned Gram Sabhas or
Municipalities.
(5) A public hearing shall be conducted in such manner as may be prescribed, after giving
adequate publicity about the date, time and venue for the public hearing at the affected area:
Provided that in case where an affected area involves more than one Gram Panchayat or
Municipality, public hearings shall be conducted in every Gram Sabha and Municipality where more
than twenty-five per cent. of land belonging to that Gram Sabha or Municipality is being acquired:
Provided further that the consultation with the Gram Sabha in Scheduled Areas shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas)
Act, 1996 (40 of 1996).
(6) The Administrator shall, on completion of public hearing submit the draft Scheme for

16

Rehabilitation and Resettlement along with a specific report on the claims and objections raised in the
public hearing to the Collector.
17. Review of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme.–(1) The Collector shall review the
draft Scheme submitted under sub-section (6) of section 16 by the Administrator with the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee at the project level constituted under section 45.
(2) The Collector shall submit the draft Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme with his
suggestions to the Commissioner Rehabilitation and Resettlement for approval of the Scheme.
18. Approved Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme to be made public.–The Commissioner
shall cause the approved Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme to be made available in the local
language to the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case may be, and the offices
of the District Collector, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil, and shall be published in the
affected areas, in such manner as may be prescribed, and uploaded on the website of the appropriate
Government.
19. Publication of declaration and summary of Rehabilitation and Resettlement.–(1) When
the appropriate Government is satisfied, after considering the report, if any, made under sub-section
(2) of section 15, that any particular land is needed for a public purpose, a declaration shall be made to
that effect, along with a declaration of an area identified as the ―resettlement area‖ for the purposes of
rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected families, under the hand and seal of a Secretary to such
Government or of any other officer duly authorised to certify its orders and different declarations may
be made from time to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered by the same preliminary
notification irrespective of whether one report or different reports has or have been made (wherever
required).
(2) The Collector shall publish a summary of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme along
with declaration referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided that no declaration under this sub-section shall be made unless the summary of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme is published along with such declaration:
Provided further that no declaration under this sub-section shall be made unless the Requiring
Body deposits an amount, in full or part, as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government toward
the cost of acquisition of the land:
Provided also that the Requiring Body shall deposit the amount promptly so as to enable the
appropriate Government to publish the declaration within a period of twelve months from the date of
the publication of preliminary notification under section 11.
(3) In projects where land is acquired in stages, the application for acquisition itself can specify
different stages for the rehabilitation and resettlement, and all declarations shall be made according to
the stages so specified.
(4) Every declaration referred to in sub-section (1) shall be published in the following manner,
namely:—
(a) in the Official Gazette;
(b) in two daily newspapers being circulated in the locality, of such area of which one shall be
in the regional language;
(c) in the local language in the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as the case
may be, and in the offices of the District Collector, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Tehsil;
(d) uploaded on the website of the appropriate Government;
(e) in the affected areas, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Every declaration referred to in sub-section (1) shall indicate,—
(a) the district or other territorial division in which the land is situated;

17

(b) the purpose for which it is needed, its approximate area; and
(c) where a plan shall have been made for the land, the place at which such plan may be
inspected without any cost.
(6) The declaration referred to in sub-section (1) shall be conclusive evidence that the land is
required for a public purpose and, after making such declaration, the appropriate Government may
acquire the land in such manner as specified under this Act.
(7) Where no declaration is made under sub-section (1) within twelve months from the date of
preliminary notification, then such notification shall be deemed to have been rescinded:
Provided that in computing the period referred to in this sub-section, any period or periods during
which the proceedings for the acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay or injunction
by the order of any Court shall be excluded:
Provided further that the appropriate Government shall have the power to extend the period of
twelve months, if in its opinion circumstances exist justifying the same:
Provided also that any such decision to extend the period shall be recorded in writing and the same
shall be notified and be uploaded on the website of the authority concerned.
20. Land to be marked out, measured and planned including marking of specific areas.–The
Collector shall thereupon cause the land, unless it has been already marked out under section 12, to be
marked out and measured, and if no plan has been made thereof, a plan to be made of the same.
21. Notice to persons interested.–(1) The Collector shall publish the public notice on his website
and cause public notice to be given at convenient places on or near the land to be taken, stating that the
Government intends to take possession of the land, and that claims to compensations and rehabilitation
and resettlement for all interests in such land may be made to him.
(2) The public notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the particulars of the land so needed,
and require all persons interested in the land to appear personally or by agent or advocate before the
Collector at a time and place mentioned in the public notice not being less than thirty days and not
more than six months after the date of publication of the notice, and to state the nature of their
respective interests in the land and the amount and particulars of their claims to compensation for such
interests, their claims to rehabilitation and resettlement along with their objections, if any, to the
measurements made under section 20.
(3) The Collector may in any case require such statement referred to in sub-section (2) to be made
in writing and signed by the party or his agent.
(4) The Collector shall also serve notice to the same effect on the occupier, if any, of such land and
on all such persons known or believed to be interested therein, be entitled to act for persons so
interested, as reside or have agents authorised to receive service on their behalf, within the revenue
district in which the land is situated.
(5) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, and has no such agent, the Collector shall
ensure that the notice shall be sent to him by post in letter addressed to him at his last known
residence, address of place or business and also publish the same in at least two national daily
newspapers and also on his website.
22. Power to require and enforce the making of statements as to names and interests.–(1) The
Collector may also require any such person to make or deliver to him, at a time and place mentioned
(such time not being less than thirty days after the date of the requisition), a statement containing, so
far as may be practicable, the name of every other person possessing any interest in the land or any
part thereof as co-proprietor, sub-proprietor, mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and of the nature of such
interest, and of the rents and profits, if any, received or receivable on account thereof for three years
next preceding the date of the statement.
(2) Every person required to make or deliver a statement under this section shall be deemed to be
legally bound to do so within the meaning of sections 175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860).

18

23. Enquiry and land acquisition award by Collector.–On the day so fixed, or on any other day
to which the enquiry has been adjourned, the Collector shall proceed to enquire into the objections (if
any) which any person interested has stated pursuant to a notice given under section 21, to the
measurements made under section 20, and into the value of the land at the date of the publication of
the notification, and into the respective interests of the persons claiming the compensation and
rehabilitation and resettlement, shall make an award under his hand of—
(a) the true area of the land;
(b) the compensation as determined under section 27 along with Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Award as determined under section 31 and which in his opinion should be allowed
for the land; and
(c) the apportionment of the said compensation among all the persons known or believed to be
interested in the land, or whom, or of whose claims, he has information, whether or not they have
respectively appeared before him.
24. Land acquisition process under Act No. 1 of 1894 shall be deemed to have lapsed in
certain cases.–(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, in any case of land acquisition
proceedings initiated under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894,—
(a) where no award under section 11 of the said Land Acquisition Act has been made, then, all
provisions of this Act relating to the determination of compensation shall apply; or
(b) where an award under said section 11 has been made, then such proceedings shall continue
under the provisions of the said Land Acquisition Act, as if the said Act has not been repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in case of land acquisition proceedings
initiated under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), where an award under the said section 11
has been made five years or more prior to the commencement of this Act but the physical possession
of the land has not been taken or the compensation has not been paid the said proceedings shall be
deemed to have lapsed and the appropriate Government, if it so chooses, shall initiate the proceedings
of such land acquisition afresh in accordance with the provisions of this Act:
Provided that where an award has been made and compensation in respect of a majority of land
holdings has not been deposited in the account of the beneficiaries, then, all beneficiaries specified in
the notification for acquisition under section 4 of the said Land Acquisition Act, shall be entitled to
compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
25. Period within which an award shall be made.–The Collector shall make an award within a
period of twelve months from the date of publication of the declaration under section 19 and if no
award is made within that period, the entire proceedings for the acquisition of the land shall lapse:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall have the power to extend the period of twelve
months if in its opinion, circumstances exist justifying the same:
Provided further that any such decision to extend the period shall be recorded in writing and the
same shall be notified and be uploaded on the website of the authority concerned.
26. Determination of market value of land by Collector.–(1) The Collector shall adopt the
following criteria in assessing and determining the market value of the land, namely:—
(a) the market value, if any, specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) for the
registration of sale deeds or agreements to sell, as the case may be, in the area, where the land is
situated; or
(b) the average sale price for similar type of land situated in the nearest village or nearest
vicinity area; or
(c) consented amount of compensation as agreed upon under sub-section (2) of section 2 in
case of acquisition of lands for private companies or for public private partnership projects,
whichever is higher:

19

Provided that the date for determination of market value shall be the date on which the
notification has been issued under section 11.
Explanation 1.—The average sale price referred to in clause (b) shall be determined taking into
account the sale deeds or the agreements to sell registered for similar type of area in the near village or
near vicinity area during immediately preceding three years of the year in which such acquisition of
land is proposed to be made.
Explanation 2.—For determining the average sale price referred to in Explanation 1, one-half of
the total number of sale deeds or the agreements to sell in which the highest sale price has been
mentioned shall be taken into account.
Explanation 3.—While determining the market value under this section and the average sale
price referred to in Explanation 1 or Explanation 2, any price paid as compensation for land acquired
under the provisions of this Act on an earlier occasion in the district shall not be taken into
consideration.
Explanation 4.—While determining the market value under this section and the average sale
price referred to in Explanation 1 or Explanation 2, any price paid, which in the opinion of the
Collector is not indicative of actual prevailing market value may be discounted for the purposes of
calculating market value.
(2) The market value calculated as per sub-section (1) shall be multiplied by a factor to be
specified in the First Schedule.
(3) Where the market value under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) cannot be determined for the
reason that—
(a) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in land are restricted by or under
any other law for the time being in force in that area; or
(b) the registered sale deeds or agreements to sell as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section
(1) for similar land are not available for the immediately preceding three years; or
(c) the market value has not been specified under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899)
by the appropriate authority,
the State Government concerned shall specify the floor price or minimum price per unit area of the
said land based on the price calculated in the manner specified in sub-section (1) in respect of similar
types of land situated in the immediate adjoining areas:
Provided that in a case where the Requiring Body offers its shares to the owners of the lands
(whose lands have been acquired) as a part compensation, for acquisition of land, such shares in no
case shall exceed twenty-five per cent, of the value so calculated under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2) or sub-section (3) as the case may be:
Provided further that the Requiring Body shall in no case compel any owner of the land (whose
land has been acquired) to take its shares, the value of which is deductible in the value of the land
calculated under sub-section (1):
Provided also that the Collector shall, before initiation of any land acquisition proceedings in any
area, take all necessary steps to revise and update the market value of the land on the basis of the
prevalent market rate in that area:
Provided also that the appropriate Government shall ensure that the market value determined for
acquisition of any land or property of an educational institution established and administered by a
religious or linguistic minority shall be such as would not restrict or abrogate the right to establish and
administer educational institutions of their choice.
27. Determination of amount of compensation.–The Collector having determined the market
value of the land to be acquired shall calculate the total amount of compensation to be paid to the land
owner (whose land has been acquired) by including all assets attached to the land.

20

28. Parameters to be considered by Collector in determination of award.–In determining the
amount of compensation to be awarded for land acquired under this Act, the Collector shall take into
consideration—
firstly, the market value as determined under section 26 and the award amount in accordance
with the First and Second Schedules;
secondly, the damage sustained by the person interested, by reason of the taking of any
standing crops and trees which may be on the land at the time of the Collector's taking possession
thereof;
thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at the time of the Collector's
taking possession of the land, by reason of severing such land from his other land;
fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at the time of the Collector's
taking possession of the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other property,
movable or immovable, in any other manner, or his earnings;
fifthly, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the Collector, the person interested is
compelled to change his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental
to such change;
sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminution of the profits of the land
between the time of the publication of the declaration under section 19 and the time of the
Collector's taking possession of the land; and
seventhly, any other ground which may be in the interest of equity, justice and beneficial to the
affected families.
29. Determination of value of things attached to land or building.–(1) The Collector in
determining the market value of the building and other immovable property or assets attached to the
land or building which are to be acquired, use the services of a competent engineer or any other
specialist in the relevant field, as may be considered necessary by him.
(2) The Collector for the purpose of determining the value of trees and plants attached to the land
acquired, use the services of experienced persons in the field of agriculture, forestry, horticulture,
sericulture, or any other field, as may be considered necessary by him.
(3) The Collector for the purpose of assessing the value of the standing crops damaged during the
process of land acquisition, may use the services of experienced persons in the field of agriculture as
may be considered necessary by him.
30. Award of solatium.–(1) The Collector having determined the total compensation to be paid,
shall, to arrive at the final award, impose a ―Solatium‖ amount equivalent to one hundred per cent. of
the compensation amount.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that solatium amount shall be in
addition to the compensation payable to any person whose land has been acquired.
(2) The Collector shall issue individual awards detailing the particulars of compensation payable
and the details of payment of the compensation as specified in the First Schedule.
(3) In addition to the market value of the land provided under section 26, the Collector shall, in
every case, award an amount calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum on such market value
for the period commencing on and from the date of the publication of the notification of the Social
Impact Assessment study under sub-section (2) of section 4, in respect of such land, till the date of the
award of the Collector or the date of taking possession of the land, whichever is earlier.

21

CHAPTER V
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT AWARD
31. Rehabilitation and Resettlement Award for affected families by Collector.–(1) The
Collector shall pass Rehabilitation and Resettlement Awards for each affected family in terms of the
entitlements provided in the Second Schedule.
(2) The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Award shall include all of the following, namely:—
(a) rehabilitation and resettlement amount payable to the family;
(b) bank account number of the person to which the rehabilitation and resettlement award
amount is to be transferred;
(c) particulars of house site and house to be allotted, in case of displaced families;
(d) particulars of land allotted to the displaced families;
(e) particulars of one time subsistence allowance and transportation allowance in case of
displaced families;
(f) particulars of payment for cattle shed and petty shops;
(g) particulars of one-time amount to artisans and small traders;
(h) details of mandatory employment to be provided to the members of the affected families;
(i) particulars of any fishing rights that may be involved;
(j) particulars of annuity and other entitlements to be provided;
(k) particulars of special provisions for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to be
provided:
Provided that in case any of the matters specified under clauses (a) to (k) are not applicable to any
affected family the same shall be indicated as ―not applicable‖:
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, by notification increase the rate of
rehabilitation and resettlement amount payable to the affected families, taking into account the rise in
the price index.
32. Provision of infrastructural amenities in resettlement area.–In every resettlement area as
defined under this Act, the Collector shall ensure the provision of all infrastructural facilities and basic
minimum amenities specified in the Third Schedule.
33. Corrections to awards by Collector.–(1) The Collector may at any time, but not later than six
months from the date of award or where he has been required under the provisions of this Act to make
a reference to the Authority under section 64, before the making of such reference, by order, correct
any clerical or arithmetical mistakes in either of the awards or errors arising therein either on his own
motion or on the application of any person interested or local authority:
Provided that no correction which is likely to affect prejudicially any person shall be made unless
such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation in the matter.
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any correction made in the award so corrected to
all the persons interested.
(3) Where any excess amount is proved to have been paid to any person as a result of the
correction made under sub-section (1), the excess amount so paid shall be liable to be refunded and in
the case of any default or refusal to pay, the same may be recovered, as prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
34. Adjournment of enquiry.–The Collector may, for any cause he thinks fit, from time to time
adjourn the enquiry to a day to be fixed by him.

22

35. Power to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses and production of documents.–For
the purpose of enquiries under this Act, the Collector shall have powers to summon and enforce the
attendance of witnesses, including the parties interested of any of them, and to compel the production
of documents by the same means, and (so far as may be) in the same manner as is provided in the case
of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).
36. Power to call for records, etc.–The appropriate Government may at any time before the
award is made by the Collector under section 30 call for any record of any proceedings (whether by
way of inquiry or otherwise) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any
findings or order passed or as to the regularity of such proceedings and may pass such order or issue
such direction in relation thereto as it may think fit:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall not pass or issue any order or direction prejudicial
to any person without affording such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
37. Awards of Collector when to be final.–(1) The Awards shall be filed in the Collector‘s office
and shall, except as hereinafter provided, be final and conclusive evidence, as between the Collector
and the persons interested, whether they have respectively appeared before the Collector or not, of the
true area and market value of the land and the assets attached thereto, solatium so determined and the
apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested.
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of his awards to such of the persons interested who
are not present personally or through their representatives when the awards are made.
(3) The Collector shall keep open to the public and display a summary of the entire proceedings
undertaken in a case of acquisition of land including the amount of compensation awarded to each
individual along with details of the land finally acquired under this Act on the website created for this
purpose.
38. Power to take possession of land to be acquired.–(1) The Collector shall take possession of
land after ensuring that full payment of compensation as well as rehabilitation and resettlement
entitlements are paid or tendered to the entitled persons within a period of three months for the
compensation and a period of six months for the monetary part of rehabilitation and resettlement
entitlements listed in the Second Schedule commencing from the date of the award made under section
30:
Provided that the components of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Package in the Second and
Third Schedules that relate to infrastructural entitlements shall be provided within a period of eighteen
months from the date of the award:
Provided further that in case of acquisition of land for irrigation or hydel project, being a public
purpose, the rehabilitation and resettlement shall be completed six months prior to submergence of the
lands acquired.
(2) The Collector shall be responsible for ensuring that the rehabilitation and resettlement process
is completed in all its aspects before displacing the affected families.
39. Additional compensation in case of multiple displacements.–The Collector shall, as far as
possible, not displace any family which has already been displaced by the appropriate Government for
the purpose of acquisition under the provisions of this Act, and if so displaced, shall pay an additional
compensation equivalent to that of the compensation determined under this Act for the second or
successive displacements.
40. Special powers in case of urgency to acquire land in certain cases.–(1) In cases of urgency,
whenever the appropriate Government so directs, the Collector, though no such award has been made,
may, on the expiration of thirty days from the publication of the notice mentioned in section 21, take
possession of any land needed for a public purpose and such land shall thereupon vest absolutely in the
Government, free from all encumbrances.
(2) The powers of the appropriate Government under sub-section (1) shall be restricted to the
minimum area required for the defence of India or national security or for any emergencies arising out
of natural calamities or any other emergency with the approval of Parliament:

23

Provided that the Collector shall not take possession of any building or part of a building under
this sub-section without giving to the occupier thereof at least forty-eight hours notice of his intention
to do so, or such longer notice as may be reasonably sufficient to enable such occupier to remove his
movable property from such building without unnecessary inconvenience.
(3) Before taking possession of any land under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Collector
shall tender payment of eighty per cent. of the compensation for such land as estimated by him to the
person interested entitled thereto.
(4) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, the provisions
of sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) are applicable, the appropriate Government may
direct that any or all of the provisions of Chapter II to Chapter VI shall not apply, and, if it does so
direct, a declaration may be made under section 19 in respect of the land at any time after the date of
the publication of the preliminary notification under sub-section (1) of section 11.
(5) An additional compensation of seventy-five per cent. of the total compensation as determined
under section 27, shall be paid by the Collector in respect of land and property for acquisition of which
proceedings have been initiated under sub-section (1) of this section:
Provided that no additional compensation will be required to be paid in case the project is one that
affects the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security and strategic interests of the State or
relations with foreign States.
41. Special provisions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.–(1) As far as possible, no
acquisition of land shall be made in the Scheduled Areas.
(2) Where such acquisition does take place it shall be done only as a demonstrable last resort.
(3) In case of acquisition or alienation of any land in the Scheduled Areas, the prior consent of the
concerned Gram Sabha or the Panchayats or the autonomous District Councils, at the appropriate level
in Scheduled Areas under the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, as the case may be, shall be obtained,
in all cases of land acquisition in such areas, including acquisition in case of urgency, before issue of a
notification under this Act, or any other Central Act or a State Act for the time being in force:
Provided that the consent of the Panchayats or the Autonomous Districts Councils shall be
obtained in cases where the Gram Sabha does not exist or has not been constituted.
(4) In case of a project involving land acquisition on behalf of a Requiring Body which involves
involuntary displacement of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes families, a Development
Plan shall be prepared, in such form as may be prescribed, laying down the details of procedure for
settling land rights due, but not settled and restoring titles of the Scheduled Tribes as well as the
Scheduled Castes on the alienated land by undertaking a special drive together with land acquisition.
(5) The Development Plan shall also contain a programme for development of alternate fuel,
fodder and non-timber forest produce resources on non-forest lands within a period of five years,
sufficient to meet the requirements of tribal communities as well as the Scheduled Castes.
(6) In case of land being acquired from members of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes,
at least one-third of the compensation amount due shall be paid to the affected families initially as first
instalment and the rest shall be paid after taking over of the possession of the land.
(7) The affected families of the Scheduled Tribes shall be resettled preferably in the same
Scheduled Area in a compact block so that they can retain their ethnic, linguistic and cultural identity.
(8) The resettlement areas predominantly inhabited by the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall get land, to such extent as may be decided by the appropriate Government free of cost for
community and social gatherings.
(9) Any alienation of tribal lands or lands belonging to members of the Scheduled Castes in
disregard of the laws and regulations for the time being in force shall be treated as null and void, and
in the case of acquisition of such lands, the rehabilitation and resettlement benefits shall be made
available to the original tribal land owners or land owners belonging to the Scheduled Castes.

24

(10) The affected Scheduled Tribes, other traditional forest dwellers and the Scheduled Castes
having fishing rights in a river or pond or dam in the affected area shall be given fishing rights in the
reservoir area of the irrigation or hydel projects.
(11) Where the affected families belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are
relocated outside of the district, then, they shall be paid an additional twenty-five per cent.
rehabilitation and resettlement benefits to which they are entitled in monetary terms along with a onetime entitlement of fifty thousand rupees.
42. Reservation and other benefits.–(1) All benefits, including the reservation benefits available
to the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in the affected areas shall continue in the
resettlement area.
(2) Whenever the affected families belonging to the Scheduled Tribes who are residing in the
Scheduled Areas referred to in the Fifth Schedule or the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to
the Constitution are relocated outside those areas, than, all the statutory safeguards, entitlements and
benefits being enjoyed by them under this Act shall be extended to the area to which they are resettled
regardless of whether the resettlment area is a Scheduled Area referred to in the said Fifth Schedule, or
a tribal area referred to in the said Sixth Schedule, or not.
(3) Where the community rights have been settled under the provisions of the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007), the same shall
be quantified in monetary amount and be paid to the individual concerned who has been displaced due
to the acquisition of land in proportion with his share in such community rights.
CHAPTER VI
PROCEDURE AND MANNER OF REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
43. Appointment of Administrator.–(1) Where the appropriate Government is satisfied that there
is likely to be involuntary displacement of persons due to acquisition of land, then, the State
Government shall, by notification, appoint in respect of that project, an officer not below the rank of
Joint Collector or Additional Collector or Deputy Collector or equivalent official of Revenue
Department to be the Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement.
(2) The Administrator shall, with a view to enable him to function efficiently and to meet the
special time-frame, be provided with such powers, duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government and provided with office infrastructure and be assisted by such officers
and employees who shall be subordinate to him as the appropriate Government may decide.
(3) Subject to the superintendence, directions and control of the appropriate Government and the
Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the formulation, execution and monitoring of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme shall vest in the Administrator.
44. Commissioner for rehabilitation and resettlement.–(1) The State Government shall appoint
an officer of the rank of Commissioner or Secretary of that Government for rehabilitation and
resettlement of affected families under this Act, to be called the Commissioner for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement.
(2) The Commissioner shall be responsible for supervising the formulation of rehabilitation and
resettlement schemes or plans and proper implementation of such schemes or plans.
(3) The Commissioner shall be responsible for the post-implementation social audit in consultation
with the Gram Sabha in rural areas and municipality in urban areas.
45. Rehabilitation and resettlement committee at project level.–(1) Where land proposed to be
acquired is equal to or more than one hundred acres, the appropriate Government shall constitute a
Committee under the chairmanship of the Collector to be called the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee, to monitor and review the progress of implementation of the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement scheme and to carry out post-implementation social audits in consultation with the Gram
Sabha in rural areas and municipality in urban areas.
(2) The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee shall include, apart from officers of the

25

appropriate Government, the following members, namely:—
(a) a representative of women residing in the affected area;
(b) a representative each of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes residing in the
affected area;
(c) a representative of a voluntary organisation working in the area;
(d) a representative of a nationalised bank;
(e) the Land Acquisition Officer of the project;
(f) the Chairpersons of the panchayats or municipalities located in the affected area or their
nominees;
(g) the Chairperson of the District Planning Committee or his nominee;
(h) the Member of Parliament and Member of the Legislative Assembly of the concerned area
or their nominees;
(i) a representative of the Requiring Body; and
(j) Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement as the Member-Convenor.
(3) The procedure regulating the discharge of the process given in this section and other matters
connected thereto of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee shall be such as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
46. Provisions relating to rehabilitation and resettlement to apply in case of certain persons
other than specified persons.—(1) Where any person other than a specified person is purchasing land
through private negotiations for an area equal to or more than such limits, as may be notified by the
appropriate Government, considering the relevant State specific factors and circumstances, for which
the payment of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Costs under this Act is required, he shall file an
application with the District Collector notifying him of—
(a) intent to purchase;
(b) purpose for which such purchase is being made;
(c) particulars of lands to be purchased.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Collector to refer the matter to the Commissioner for the satisfaction
of all relevant provisions under this Act related to rehabilitation and resettlement.
(3) Based upon the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme approved by the Commissioner as per
the provisions of this Act, the Collector shall pass individual awards covering Rehabilitation and
Resettlement entitlements as per the provisions of this Act.
(4) No land use change shall be permitted if rehabilitation and resettlement is not complied with in
full.
(5) Any purchase of land by a person other than specified persons without complying with the
provisions of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme shall be void ab initio:
Provided that the appropriate Government may provide for rehabilitation and resettlement
provisions on sale or purchase of land in its State and shall also fix the limits or ceiling for the said
purpose.
(6) If any land has been purchased through private negotiations by a person on or after the 5th day
of September, 2011, which is more than such limits referred to in sub-section (1) and, if the same land
is acquired within three years from the date of commencement of this Act, then, forty per cent. of the
compensation paid for such land acquired shall be shared with the original land owners.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression—
(a) ―original land owner‖ refers to the owner of the land as on the 5th day of September, 2011;

26

(b) ―specified persons‖ includes any person other than—
(i) appropriate Government;
(ii) Government company;
(iii) association of persons or trust or society as registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), wholly or partially aided by the appropriate Government or controlled
by the appropriate Government.
47. Quantification and deposit of rehabilitation and resettlement amount.–Where the
Collector is of the view that the obligations of the Requiring Body with regard to rehabilitation and
resettlement can be quantified into monetary amount, he shall allow the payment of such amount into
an account in complete satisfaction of such obligations, which shall be administered by the
Administrator appointed under section 43, under the supervision of the Collector.
CHAPTER VII
NATIONAL MONITORING COMMITTEE FOR REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
48. Establishment of National Monitoring Committee for rehabilitation and resettlement.–(1)
The Central Government may, whenever necessary, for national or inter-State projects, constitute a
National Monitoring Committee for reviewing and monitoring the implementation of rehabilitation
and resettlement schemes or plans under this Act.
(2) The Committee may, besides having representation of the concerned Ministries and
Departments of the Central and State Governments, associate with it eminent experts from the relevant
fields.
(3) The procedures to be followed by the Committee and the allowances payable to the experts
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide officers and other employees to the Committee
necessary for its efficient functioning.
49. Reporting requirements.–The States and Union territories shall provide all the relevant
information on the matters covered under this Act, to the National Monitoring Committee in a regular
and timely manner, and also as and when required.
50. Establishment of State Monitoring Committee for rehabilitation and resettlement.–(1)
The State Government shall constitute a State Monitoring Committee for reviewing and monitoring
the implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement schemes or plans under this Act.
(2) The Committee may, besides having representatives of the concerned Ministries and
Departments of the State Government, associate with it eminent experts from the relevant fields.
(3) The procedures to be followed by the Committee and the allowances payable to the experts
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State.
(4) The State Government shall provide such officers and other employees to the Committee as
may be necessary for its efficient functioning.
CHAPTER VIII
ESTABLISHMENT OF LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT AUTHORITY
51. Establishment of Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority.–(1) The
appropriate Government shall, for the purpose of providing speedy disposal of disputes relating to land
acquisition, compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement, establish, by notification, one or more
Authorities to be known as ―the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority‖ to
exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also specify in the notification referred to in sub-section (1)
the areas within which the Authority may exercise jurisdiction for entertaining and deciding the
references made to it under section 64 or applications made by the applicant under second proviso to

27

sub-section (1) of section 64.
52. Composition of Authority.–(1) The Authority shall consist of one person only (hereinafter
referred to as the Presiding Officer) to be appointed, by notification, by the appropriate Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the appropriate Government may
authorise the Presiding Officer of one Authority to discharge also the functions of the Presiding
Officer of another Authority.
53. Qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officer.–(1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as the Presiding Officer of an Authority unless,—
(a) he is or has been a District Judge; or
(b) he is a qualified legal practitioner for not less than seven years.
(2) A Presiding Officer shall be appointed by the appropriate Government in consultation with the
Chief Justice of a High Court in whose jurisdiction the Authority is proposed to be established.
54. Terms of office of Presiding Officer.–The Presiding Officer of an Authority shall hold office
for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
55. Staff of Authority.–(1) The appropriate Government shall provide the Authority with a
Registrar and such other officers and employees as that Government may think fit.
(2) The Registrar and other officers and employees of an Authority shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Presiding Officer.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Registrar and other officers
and employees of an Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
56. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officers.–
The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service (including pension,
gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Presiding Officer of an Authority, shall be such as may be
prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the
said Presiding Officers shall be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
57. Filling up of vacancies.–If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs
in the office of the Presiding Officer of an Authority then the appropriate Government shall appoint
another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings
may be continued before the Authority from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
58. Resignation and removal.–(1) The Presiding Officer of an Authority may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the appropriate Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Presiding Officer shall, unless he is permitted by the appropriate Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until
the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Presiding Officer of an Authority shall not be removed from his office except by an order
made by the appropriate Government on the ground of proven misbehaviour or incapacity after inquiry
in the case of the Presiding Officer of an Authority made by a Judge of a High Court in which the
Presiding Officer concerned has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in respect of these charges.
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid Presiding Officer.
59. Orders constituting Authority to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.–No order
of the appropriate Government appointing any person as the Presiding Officer of an Authority shall be
called in question in any manner, and no act or proceeding before an Authority shall be called in

28

question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the constitution of an Authority.
60. Powers of Authority and procedure before it.–(1) The Authority shall, for the purposes of its
functions under this Act, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall have original jurisdiction to adjudicate upon every reference made to it
under section 64.
(3) The Authority shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other
provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the Authority shall have the power to regulate
its own procedure.
(4) The Authority shall, after receiving reference under section 64 and after giving notice of such
reference to all the parties concerned and after affording opportunity of hearing to all parties, dispose
of such reference within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such reference and make an
award accordingly.
(5) The Authority shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned within a
period of fifteen days from the date of such award.
61. Proceedings before Authority to be judicial proceedings.–All proceedings before the
Authority shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
62. Members and officers of Authority to be public servants.–The Member and officers of the
Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).
63. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.–No civil court (other than High Court under article 226 or
article 227 of the Constitution or the Supreme Court) shall have jurisdiction to entertain any dispute
relating to land acquisition in respect of which the Collector or the Authority is empowered by or
under this Act, and no injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of any such matter.
64. Reference to Authority.–(1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by
written application to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Authority, as the case may be, whether his objection be to the measurement of the
land, the amount of the compensation, the person to whom it is payable, the rights of Rehabilitation
and Resettlement under Chapters V and VI or the apportionment of the compensation among the
persons interested:
Provided that the Collector shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of
application, make a reference to the appropriate Authority:
Provided further that where the Collector fails to make such reference within the period so
specified, the applicant may apply to the Authority, as the case may be, requesting it to direct the
Collector to make the reference to it within a period of thirty days.
(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken:

29

Provided that every such application shall be made—
(a) person making it was present or represented before the Collector at the time when he made
his award, within six weeks from the date of the Collector‘s award;
(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector under
section 21, or within six months from the date of the Collector‘s award, whichever period shall
first expire:
Provided further that the Collector may entertain an application after the expiry of the said period,
within a further period of one year, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it
within the period specified in the first proviso.
65. Collector’s statement to Authority.–(1) In making the reference, the Collector shall state for
the information of the Authority, in writing under his hand—
(a) the situation and extent of the land, with particulars of any trees, buildings or standing
crops thereon;
(b) the names of the persons whom he has reason to think interested in such land;
(c) the amount awarded for damages and paid or tendered under section 13, and the amount of
compensation awarded under the provisions of this Act;
(d) the amount paid or deposited under any other provisions of this Act; and
(e) if the objection be to the amount of the compensation, the grounds on which the amount of
compensation was determined.
(2) The statement under sub-section (1) shall be attached a schedule giving the particulars of the
notices served upon, and of the statements in writing made or delivered by the persons interested
respectively.
66. Service of notice by Authority.–The Authority shall thereupon cause a notice specifying the
day on which the Authority will proceed to determine the objection, and directing their appearance
before the Authority on that day, to be served on the following persons, namely:—
(a) the applicant;
(b) all persons interested in the objection, except such (if any) of them as have consented
without protest to receive payment of the compensation awarded; and
(c) if the objection is in regard to the area of the land or to the amount of the compensation, the
Collector.
67. Restriction on scope of proceedings.–The scope of the enquiry in every such proceeding shall
be restricted to a consideration of the interest of the persons affected by the objection.
68. Proceeding to be in public.–Every such proceeding shall take place in public, and all persons
entitled to practice in any Civil Court in the State shall be entitled to appear, plead and act (as the case
may be) in such proceeding.
69. Determination of award by authority.–(1) In determining the amount of compensation to be
awarded for land acquired including the Rehabilitation and Resettlement entitlements, the Authority
shall take into consideration whether the Collector has followed the parameters set out under section
26 to section 30 and the provisions under Chapter V of this Act.
(2) In addition to the market value of the land, as above provided, the Authority shall in every case
award an amount calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum on such market value for the
period commencing on and from the date of the publication of the preliminary notification under
section 11 in respect of such land to the date of the award of the Collector or the date of taking
possession of the land, whichever is earlier.
Explanation.—In computing the period referred to in this sub-section, any period or periods during
which the proceedings for the acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay or injunction
by the order of any Court shall be excluded.

30

(3) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided, the Authority shall in every case
award a solatium of one hundred per cent. over the total compensation amount.
70. Form of award.–(1) Every award under this Chapter shall be in writing signed by the
Presiding Officer of the Authority, and shall specify the amount awarded under clause first of section
28, and also the amounts (if any) respectively awarded under each of the other clauses of the same subsection, together with the grounds of awarding each of the said amounts.
(2) Every such award shall be deemed to be a decree and the statement of the grounds of every
such award a judgment within the meaning of clause (2), and clause (9) of respectively, of section 2 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).
71. Costs.–(1) Every such award shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the proceeding
under this Chapter, and by what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.
(2) When the award of the Collector is not upheld, the cost shall ordinarily be paid by the
Collector, unless the Authority concerned is of the opinion that the claim of the applicant was so
extravagant or that he was so negligent in putting his case before the Collector that some deduction
from his costs should be made or that he should pay a part of the Collector‘s costs.
72. Collector may be directed to pay interest on excess compensation.–If the sum, which in the
opinion of the Authority concerned, the Collector ought to have awarded as compensation is in excess
of the sum which the Collector did award as compensation, the award of the Authority concerned may
direct that the Collector shall pay interest on such excess at the rate of nine per cent. per annum from
the date on which he took possession of the land to the date of payment of such excess into Authority:
Provided that the award of the Authority concerned may also direct that where such excess or any
part thereof is paid to the Authority after the date or expiry of a period of one year from the date on
which possession is taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. per annum shall be payable from the
date of expiry of the said period of one year on the amount of such excess or part thereof which has not
been paid into Authority before the date of such expiry.
73. Re-determination of amount of compensation on the basis of the award of the Authority.–
(1) Where in an award under this Chapter, the Authority concerned allows to the applicant any amount
of compensation in excess of the amount awarded by the Collector under section 23, the persons
interested in all the other land covered by the same preliminary notification under section 11, and who
are also aggrieved by the award of the Collector may, notwithstanding that they had not made an
application to the Collector, by written application to the Collector within three months from the date
of the award of the Authority concerned require that the amount of compensation payable to them may
be re-determined on the basis of the amount of compensation awarded by the Authority:
Provided that in computing the period of three months within which an application to the Collector
shall be made under this sub-section, the day on which the award was pronounced and the time
requisite for obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded.
(2) The Collector shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), conduct an inquiry after
giving notice to all the persons interested and giving them a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and
make an award determining the amount of compensation payable to the applicants.
(3) Any person who has not accepted the award under sub-section (2) may, by written application
to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the determination of the
Authority concerned.
74. Appeal to High Court.–(1) The Requiring Body or any person aggrieved by the Award passed
by an Authority under section 69 may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date
of Award:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not
exceeding sixty days.

31

(2) Every appeal referred to under sub-section (1) shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made to dispose of such appeal within six months from the date on which the
appeal is presented to the High Court.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ―High Court‖ means the High Court within the
jurisdiction of which the land acquired or proposed to be acquired is situated.
CHAPTER IX
APPORTIONMENT OF COMPENSATION
75. Particulars of apportionment to be specified.–When there are several persons interested, if
such persons agree in the apportionment of the compensation, the particulars of such apportionment
shall be specified in the award, and as between such persons the award shall be conclusive evidence of
the correctness of the apportionment.
76. Dispute as to apportionment.–When the amount of compensation has been settled, if any
dispute arises as to the apportionment of the same or any part thereof, or as to the persons to whom the
same or any part thereof is payable, the Collector may refer such disputes to the Authority.
CHAPTER X
PAYMENT
77. Payment of compensation or deposit of same in Authority.–(1) On making an award under
section 30, the Collector shall tender payment of the compensation awarded by him to the persons
interested entitled thereto according to the award and shall pay it to them by depositing the amount in
their bank accounts unless prevented by someone or more of the contingencies mentioned in
sub-section (2).
(2) If the person entitled to compensation shall not consent to receive it, or if there be no person
competent to alienate the land, or if there be any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or
as to the apportionment of it, the Collector shall deposit the amount of the compensation in the
Authority to which a reference under section 64 would be submitted:
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such payment under protest as to
the sufficiency of the amount:
Provided further that no person who has received the amount otherwise than under protest shall be
entitled to make any application under sub-section (1) of section 64:
Provided also that nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any person, who may
receive the whole or any part of any compensation awarded under this Act, to pay the same to the
person lawfully entitled thereto.
78. Investment of money deposited in respect of lands belonging to person incompetent to
alienate.–(1) If any money is deposited in the Authority concerned under sub-section (2) of section 77
and it appears that the land in respect whereof the same was awarded belonged to any person who had
no power to alienate the same, the Authority concerned shall—
(a) order the money to be invested in the purchase of other lands to be held under the like title
and conditions of ownership as the land in respect of which such money shall have been deposited
was held; or
(b) if such purchase cannot be effected forthwith, then in such Government of other approved
securities as the Authority concerned shall think fit,
and shall direct the payment of the interest or other proceeds arising from such investment to the
person or persons who would for the time being have been entitled to the possession of the said land,
and such moneys shall remain so deposited and invested until the same be applied—
(i) in the purchase of such other lands as aforesaid; or
(ii) in payment to any person or persons becoming absolutely entitled thereto.

32

(2) In all cases of money deposited to which this section applies the Authority concerned shall order
the costs of the following matters, including therein all reasonable charge and expenses incident
thereon, to be paid by the Collector, namely:—
(a) the costs of such investments as aforesaid;
(b) the costs of the orders for the payment of the interest or other proceeds of the securities
upon which such moneys are for the time being invested, and for the payment out of the Authority
concerned of the principal of such moneys, and of all proceedings relating thereto, except such as
may be occasioned by litigation between adverse claimants.
79. Investment of money deposited in other cases.–When any money shall have been deposited
in the Authority concerned under this Act for any cause other than the causes mentioned in section 78,
the Authority may, on the application of any party interested or claiming an interest in such money,
order the same to be invested in such Government or other approved securities as it may think proper,
and paid in such manner as it may consider will give the parties interested therein the same benefit
from it as they might have had from the land in respect whereof such money shall have been deposited
or as near thereto as may be.
80. Payment of interest.–When the amount of such compensation is not paid or deposited on or
before taking possession of the land, the Collector shall pay the amount awarded with interest thereon
at the rate of nine per cent. per annum from the time of so taking possession until it shall have been so
paid or deposited:
Provided that if such compensation or any part thereof is not paid or deposited within a period of
one year from the date on which possession is taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. per annum
shall be payable from the date or expiry of the said period of one year on the amount of compensation
or part thereof which has not been paid or deposited before the date of such expiry.
CHAPTER XI
TEMPORARY OCCUPATION OF LAND
81. Temporary occupation of waste or arable land, procedure when difference as to
compensation exists.–(1) Whenever it appears to the appropriate Government that the temporary
occupation and use of any waste or arable land are needed for any public purpose, the appropriate
Government may direct the Collector to procure the occupation and use of the same for such terms as
it shall think fit, not exceeding three years from the commencement of such occupation.
(2) The Collector shall thereupon give notice in writing to the person interested in such land of the
purpose for which the same is needed, and shall, for the occupation and use thereof for such term as
aforesaid, and for the materials (if any) to be taken therefrom, pay to them such compensation, either
in a gross sum of money, or by monthly or other periodical payments, as shall be agreed upon in
writing between him and such persons respectively.
(3) In case the Collector and the persons interested differ as to the sufficiency of the compensation
or apportionment thereof, the Collector shall refer such difference to the decision of the Authority.
82. Power to enter and take possession and compensation on restoration.–(1) On payment of
such compensation, or on executing such agreement, or on making a reference under section 64, the
Collector may enter upon and take possession of the land, and use or permit the use thereof in
accordance with the terms of the said notice.
(2) On the expiration of the term, the Collector shall make or tender to the persons interested
compensation for the damage (if any) done to the land and not provided for by the agreement, and
shall restore the land to the persons interested therein:
Provided that, if the land has become permanently unfit to be used for the purpose for which it was
used immediately before the commencement of such term, and if the persons interested shall so
require, the appropriate Government shall proceed under this Act to acquire the land as if it was
needed permanently for a public purpose.

33

83. Difference as to condition of land.–In case the Collector and persons interested differ as to
the condition of the land at the expiration of the term, or as to any matter connected with the said
agreement, the Collector shall refer such difference to the decision of the Authority concerned.
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
84. Punishment for false information, mala fide action, etc.–(1) If a person, in connection with a
requirement or direction under this Act, provides any information that is false or misleading, or
produces any false document, he shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both.
(2) Any rehabilitation and resettlement benefit availed of by making a false claim or through
fraudulent means shall be liable to be recovered by the appropriate Government in the manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) Disciplinary proceedings may be drawn up by the disciplinary authority against a Government
servant, who if proved to be guilty of a mala fide action in respect of any provision of this Act, shall be
liable to such punishment including a fine as the disciplinary authority may decide.
85. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act.–If any person contravenes any of the
provisions relating to payment of compensation or rehabilitation and resettlement, every such person
shall be liable to a punishment of six months which may extend to three years or with fine or with
both.
86. Offences by companies.–(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) ―company‖ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of
individuals and a Requiring Body; and
(b) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
87. Offences by Government departments.–(1) Where an offence under this Act has been
committed by any department of the Government, the head of the department, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any person liable to any punishment if
such person proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that such person
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has
been committed by a Department of the Government and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any
officer, other than the head of the department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

34

88. Cognizance of offences by court.–No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall be competent to try any offence punishable under this Act.
89. Offences to be non-cognizable.–Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) every offence under this Act shall be deemed to be non-cognizable.
90. Offences to be cognizable only on complaint filed by certain persons.–No court shall take
cognizance of any offence under this Act which is alleged to have been committed by a Requiring
Body except on a complaint in writing made by the Collector or any other officer authorised by the
appropriate Government or any member of the affected family.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
91. Magistrate to enforce surrender.–If the Collector is opposed or impeded in taking possession
under this Act of any land, he shall, if a Magistrate, enforce the surrender of the land to himself, and if
not a Magistrate, he shall apply to a Magistrate or to the Commissioner of Police, and such Magistrate
or Commissioner, as the case may be, shall enforce the surrender of the land to the Collector.
92. Service of notice.–(1) Save as otherwise provided in section 66, the service of any notice
under this Act shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof signed, in the case of a notice,
by the officer therein mentioned, and, in the case of any other notice, by order of the Collector.
(2) Whenever it may be practicable, the service of the notice shall be made on the person therein
named.
(3) When such person cannot be found, the service may be made on any adult member of his
family residing with him; and, if no such adult member can be found, the notice may be served by
fixing the copy on the outer door of the house in which the person therein named ordinarily dwells or
carries on business, or by fixing a copy thereof in some conspicuous place in the office of the officer
aforesaid or of the Collector or in the court-house, and also in some conspicuous part of the land to be
acquired:
Provided that, if the Collector or Judge shall so direct, a notice may be sent by post, in a letter
addressed to the person named therein at his last known residence, address or place of business and
also publish the same in at least two national daily newspapers and also on his website.
93. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not
completed.–(1) The appropriate Government shall be at liberty to withdraw from the acquisition of
any land of which possession has not been taken.
(2) Whenever the appropriate Government withdraws from any such acquisition, the Collector
shall determine the amount of compensation due for the damage suffered by the owner in consequence
of the notice or of any proceedings thereunder, and shall pay such amount to the person interested,
together with all costs reasonably incurred by him in the prosecution of the proceedings under this Act
relating to the said land.
94. Acquisition of part of house or building.–(1) The provisions of this Act shall not be put in
force for the purpose of acquiring a part only of any house, manufactory or other building, if the owner
desires that the whole of such house, manufactory or building shall be so acquired:
Provided that, if any question shall arise as to whether any land proposed to be taken under this
Act does or does not form part of a house, manufactory or building within the meaning of this section,
the Collector shall refer the determination of such question to the Authority concerned and shall not be
taken possession of such land until after the question has been determined.
(2) In deciding on such a reference made under the proviso to sub-section (1), the Authority
concerned shall have regard to the question whether the land proposed to be taken, is reasonably
required for the full and unimpaired use of the house, manufactory or building.
(3) If, in the case of any claim under this Act, by a person interested, on account of the severing of
the land to be acquired from his other land, the appropriate Government is of opinion that the claim is

35

unreasonable or excessive, it may, at any time before the Collector has made his award, order the
acquisition of the whole of the land of which the land first sought to be acquired forms a part.
(4) In the case of any acquisition of land so required no fresh declaration or other proceedings
under sections 11 to 19, (both inclusive) shall be necessary; but the Collector shall without delay
furnish a copy of the order of the appropriate Government to the person interested, and shall thereafter
proceed to make his award under section 23.
95. Acquisition of land at cost of a local authority or Requiring Body.–(1) Where the
provisions of this Act are put in force for the purpose of acquiring land at the cost of any fund
controlled or managed by a local authority or of any Requiring Body, the charges of land incidental to
such acquisition shall be defrayed from or by such fund or Requiring Body.
(2) In any proceeding held before a Collector or Authority concerned in such cases the local
authority or Requiring Body concerned may appear and adduce evidence for the purpose of
determining the amount of compensation:
Provided that no such local authority or Requiring Body shall be entitled to demand a reference to
the Authority concerned under section 64.
96. Exemption from income-tax, stamp duty and fees.–No income tax or stamp duty shall be
levied on any award or agreement made under this Act, except under section 46 and no person
claiming under any such award or agreement shall be liable to pay any fee for a copy of the same.
97. Acceptance of certified copy as evidence.–In any proceeding under this Act, a certified copy
of a document registered under the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) including a copy given under
section 57 of that Act, may be accepted as evidence of the transaction recorded in such document.
98. Notice in case of suits for anything done in pursuance of Act.–No suit or other proceeding
shall be commenced against any person for anything done in pursuance of this Act, without giving to
such person a month‘s previous notice in writing of the intended proceeding, and of the cause thereof,
nor after tender of sufficient amendments.
99. No change of purpose to be allowed.–No change from the purpose or related purposes for
which the land is originally sought to be acquired shall be allowed:
Provided that if the land acquired is rendered unusable for the purpose for which it was acquired
due to a fundamental change because of any unforeseen circumstances, then the appropriate
Government may use such land for any other public purpose.
100. No change of ownership without permission to be allowed.–No change of ownership
without specific permission from the appropriate Government shall be allowed.
101. Return of unutilised land.– When any land acquired under this Act remains unutilised for a
period of five years from the date of taking over the possession, the same shall be returned to the
original owner or owners or their legal heirs, as the case may be, or to the Land Bank of the
appropriate Government by reversion in the manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "Land Bank" means a governmental entity that
focuses on the conversion of Government owned vacant, abandoned, unutilised acquired lands and
tax-delinquent properties into productive use.
102. Difference in price of land when transferred for higher consideration to be shared.–
Whenever the ownership of any land acquired under this Act is transferred to any person for a
consideration, without any development having taken place on such land, forty per cent. of the
appreciated land value shall be shared amongst the persons from whom the lands were acquired or
their heirs, in proportion to the value at which the lands were acquired within a period of five years
from the date of acquisition:
Provided that benefit shall accrue only on the first sale or transfer that occurs after the conclusion
of the acquisition proceedings.

36

103. Provisions to be in addition to existing laws.–The provisions of this Act shall be in addition
to and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
104. Option of appropriate Government to lease.–Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, the appropriate Government shall, wherever possible, be free to exercise the option of taking the
land on lease, instead of acquisition, for any public purpose referred to in sub-section (1) of section 2.
105. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases or to apply with certain
modifications.–(1) Subject to sub-section (3), the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the
enactments relating to land acquisition specified in the Fourth Schedule.
(2) Subject to sub-section (2) of section 106, the Central Government may, by notification, omit or
add to any of the enactments specified in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The Central Government shall, by notification, within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act, direct that any of the provisions of this Act relating to the determination of
compensation in accordance with the First Schedule and rehabilitation and resettlement specified in
the Second and Third Schedules, being beneficial to the affected families, shall apply to the cases of
land acquisition under the enactments specified in the Fourth Schedule or shall apply with such
exceptions or modifications that do not reduce the compensation or dilute the provisions of this Act
relating to compensation or rehabilitation and resettlement as may be specified in the notification, as
the case may be.
(4) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (3), shall be laid in draft
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses of Parliament.
106. Power to amend Schedule.–(1) The Central Government may, by notification, amend or
alter any of the Schedules to this Act, without in any way reducing the compensation or diluting the
provisions of this Act relating to compensation or rehabilitation and resettlement.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1), shall be laid in draft
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the
notification, the notification shall not be issued or as the case may be, shall be issued only in such
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses of Parliament.
107. Power of State Legislatures to enact any law more beneficial to affected families.–
Nothing in this Act shall prevent any State from enacting any law to enhance or add to the entitlements
enumerated under this Act which confers higher compensation than payable under this Act or make
provisions for rehabilitation and resettlement which is more beneficial than provided under this Act.
108. Option to affected families to avail better compensation and rehabilitation and
resettlement.–(1) Where a State law or a policy framed by the Government of a State provides for a
higher compensation than calculated under this Act for the acquisition of land, the affected persons or
his family or member of his family may at their option opt to avail such higher compensation and
rehabilitation and resettlement under such State law or such policy of the State.
(2) Where a State law or a policy framed by the Government of a State offers more beneficial
rehabilitation and resettlement provisions under that Act or policy than under this Act, the affected
persons or his family or member of his family may at his option opt to avail such rehabilitation and
resettlement provisions under such State law or such policy of the State instead of under this Act.
109. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.–(1) Subject to the other provisions of
this Act, the appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions

37

of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the process of obtaining the prior consent under the first proviso to sub-section (2) of
section 2;
(b) the limits of land in rural areas or urban areas under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of
section 2;
(c) the manner and the time limit for carrying out social impact assessment study under
sub-section (1) of section 4;
(d) the manner of preparing and publishing social impact assessment study reports under
sub-section (1) of section 6;
(e) the manner and time for conducting survey and undertaking census under sub-section (2) of
section 16;
(f) the manner of preparing draft Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme under
sub-section (5) of section 16;
(g) the manner of conducting public hearing under sub-section (5) of section 16;
(h) the manner of depositing amount by the Requiring Body under second proviso to
sub-section (2) of section 19;
(i) the manner in which and the period within which any excess amount paid may be recovered
under sub-section (3) of section 33;
(j) the form in which the Development Plan shall be prepared under sub-section (2) of
section 41;
(k) the powers, duties and responsibilities of Administrator under sub-section (2) of section 43;
(l) the procedure of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee under sub-section (3) of
section 45;
(m) the procedure to be followed by the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee and
allowances to be paid to the experts under sub-section (3) of section 48;
(n) the procedures to be followed by the State Monitoring Committee and the allowances
payable to the experts under sub-section (3) of section 50;
(o) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Registrar and other
officers and employees of an Authority under sub-section (3) of section 55;
(p) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Presiding Officer of an Authority
under section 56;
(q) any other matter under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 60;
(r) the manner of recovery of the rehabilitation and resettlement benefits, availed of by making
false claim or through fraudulent means, under sub-section (2) of section 84;
(s) the manner of returning the unutilised land by reversion under section 101;
(t) manner of publication wherever the provisions of this Act provide for;
(u) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified under this Act.
110. Rules made by Central Government to be laid before Parliament.–Every rule made by
the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any

38

modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.
111. Rules made by State Government to be laid before State Legislature.–Every rule made by
the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of
one House, before that House.
112. Previous publication of rules made by Central and State Government.–The power to
make rules by the Central or State Government under this Act shall be subject to the condition of the
rules, being made after previous publication.
113. Power to remove difficulties.–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Part, the Central Government may, by order, make such provisions or give such directions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the
removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of a period of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament.
114. Repeal and saving.–(1) The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) is hereby repealed.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the repeal under sub-section (1) shall not be held to
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897)
with regard to the effect of repeals.

39

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 30(2)]

COMPENSATION FOR LAND OWNERS
The following components shall constitute the minimum compensation package to be given
to those whose land is acquired and to tenants referred to in clause (c) of section 3 in a proportion
to be decided by the appropriate Government.
Serial Component of compensation
No.
package in respect of land
acquired under the Act
(1)

Manner of determination of value

Date of
determination
of value

(3)

(4)

(2)

1.

Market value of land

To be determined as provided under section 26.

2.

Factor by which the market value
is to be multiplied in the case of
rural areas

1.00 (One) to 2.00 (Two) based on the distance of
project from urban area, as may be notified by the
appropriate Government.

3.

Factor by which the market value
is to be multiplied in the case of
urban areas

1(One).

4.

Value of assets attached to land
or building

To be determined as provided under section 29.

5.

Solatium

Equivalent to one hundred per cent. of the market
value of land mentioned against serial number 1
multiplied by the factor specified against serial
number 2 for rural areas or serial number 3 for urban
areas plus value of assets attached to land or
building against serial number 4 under column (2).

6.

Final award in rural areas

Market value of land mentioned against serial
number 1 multiplied by the factor specified against
serial number 2 plus value of assets attached to land
or building mentioned against serial number 4 under
column (2) plus solatium mentioned against serial
number 5 under column (2).

7.

Final award in urban areas

Market value of land mentioned against serial
number 1 multiplied by the factor specified against
serial number 3 plus value of assets attached to land
or building mentioned against serial number 4 under
column (2) plus solatium mentioned against serial
number 5 under column (2).

8.

Other component, if any, to be
included

NOTE.–The date on which values mentioned under column (2) are determined should be indicated
under column (4) against each serial number.

40

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 31(1), 38(1) and 105(3)]
ELEMENTS OF REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ENTITLEMENTS FOR ALL THE AFFECTED
FAMILIES (BOTH LAND OWNERS AND THE FAMILIES WHOSE LIVELIHOOD IS PRIMARILY DEPENDENT ON
LAND ACQUIRED) IN ADDITION TO THOSE PROVIDED IN THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
Serial
No.

Elements of Rehabilitation
and Resettlement
Entitlements

Entitlement/provision

Whether
provided or
not (if
provided,
details to be
given)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.

Provision of housing units
in case of displacement

(1) If a house is lost in rural areas, a constructed house
shall be provided as per the Indira Awas Yojana
specifications. If a house is lost in urban areas, a
constructed house shall be provided, which will be not
less than 50 sq mts in plinth area.
(2) The benefits listed above shall also be extended to
any affected family which is without homestead land
and which has been residing in the area continuously
for a period of not less than three years preceding the
date of notification of the affected area and which has
been involuntarily displaced from such area:
Provided that any such family in urban areas which
opts not to take the house offered, shall get a one-time
financial assistance for house construction, which shall
not be less than one lakh fifty thousand rupees:
Provided further that if any affected family in rural
areas so prefers, the equivalent cost of the house may
be offered in lieu of the constructed house:
Provided also that no family affected by acquisition
shall be given more than one house under the
provisions of this Act.
Explanation.–The houses in urban area may, if
necessary, be provided in multi-storied building
complexes.

2.

Land for Land

In the case of irrigation project, as far as possible and
in lieu of compensation to be paid for land acquired,
each affected family owning agricultural land in the
affected area and whose land has been acquired or lost,
or who has, as a consequence of the acquisition or loss
of land, been reduced to the status of a marginal farmer
or landless, shall be allotted, in the name of each
person included in the records of rights with regard to
the affected family, a minimum of one acre of land in
the command area of the project for which the land is
acquired:
Provided that in every project those persons losing land
and belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes will be provided land equivalent to
land acquired or two and a one-half acres, whichever is
lower.

41

(1)

(2)

(3)

3.

Offer for Developed Land

In case the land is acquired for urbanisation purposes,
twenty per cent. of the developed land will be reserved
and offered to land owning project affected families, in
proportion to the area of their land acquired and at a
price equal to the cost of acquisition and the cost of
development:
Provided that in case the land owning project affected
family wishes to avail of this offer, an equivalent
amount will be deducted from the land acquisition
compensation package payable to it.

4.

Choice of Annuity or
Employment

The appropriate Government shall ensure that the
affected families are provided with the following
options:
(a) where jobs are created through the project, after
providing suitable training and skill development in the
required field, make provision for employment at a rate
not lower than the minimum wages provided for in any
other law for the time being in force, to at least one
member per affected family in the project or arrange
for a job in such other project as may be required; or
(b) one time payment of five lakhs rupees per affected
family; or
(c) annuity policies that shall pay not less than two
thousand rupees per month per family for twenty years,
with appropriate indexation to the Consumer Price
Index for Agricultural Labourers.

5.

Subsistence grant for
displaced families for a
period of one year

Each affected family which is displaced from the land
acquired shall be given a monthly subsistence
allowance equivalent to three thousand rupees per
month for a period of one year from the date of award.
In addition to this amount, the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes displaced from Scheduled Areas
shall receive an amount equivalent to fifty thousand
rupees.
In case of displacement from the Scheduled Areas, as
far as possible, the affected families shall be relocated
in a similar ecological zone, so as to preserve the
economic opportunities, language, culture and
community life of the tribal communities.

6.

Transportation cost for
displaced families

Each affected family which is displaced shall get a onetime financial assistance of fifty thousand rupees as
transportation cost for shifting of the family, building
materials, belongings and cattle.

7.

Cattle shed/Petty shops cost

Each affected family having cattle or having a petty
shop shall get one-time financial assistance of such
amount as the appropriate Government may, by
notification, specify subject to a minimum of twentyfive thousand rupees for construction of cattle shed or
petty shop as the case may be.

42

(4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

8.

One-time grant to
artisan, small traders and
certain others

Each affected family of an artisan, small
trader or self-employed person or an
affected family which owned nonagricultural
land
or
commercial,
industrial or institutional structure in the
affected area, and which has been
involuntarily displaced from the affected
area due to land acquisition, shall get
one-time financial assistance of such
amount as the appropriate Government
may, by notification, specify subject to a
minimum of twenty-five thousand
rupees.

9.

Fishing rights

In cases of irrigation or hydel projects,
the affected families may be allowed
fishing rights in the reservoirs, in such
manner as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government.

10.

One-time Resettlement
Allowance

Each affected family shall be given a
one-time ―Resettlement Allowance‖ of
fifty thousand rupees only.

11.

Stamp duty and
registration fee

(1) The stamp duty and other fees
payable for registration of the land or
house allotted to the affected families
shall be borne by the Requiring Body.
(2) The land for house allotted to the
affected families shall be free from all
encumbrances.
(3) The land or house allotted may be in
the joint names of wife and husband of
the affected family.

43

(4)

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See sections 32, 38(1) and 105(3)]
PROVISION OF INFRASTRUCTURAL AMENITIES
For resettlement of populations, the following infrastructural facilities and basic minimum
amenities are to be provided at the cost of the Requisitioning Authority to ensure that the resettled
population in the new village or colony can secure for themselves a reasonable standard of community
life and can attempt to minimise the trauma involved in displacement.
A reasonably habitable and planned settlement would have, as a minimum, the following facilities
and resources, as appropriate:
Serial
No.

Component of infrastructure amenities provided/proposed to be
provided by the acquirer of land

Details of infrastructure
amenities provided by the
acquirer of land

(1)

(2)

(3)

1.

Roads within the resettled villages and an all-weather road link to the
nearest pucca road, passages and easement rights for all the resettled
families be adequately arranged.

2.

Proper drainage as well as sanitation plans executed before physical
resettlement.

3.

One or more assured sources of safe drinking water for each family as
per the norms prescribed by the Government of India.

4.

Provision of drinking water for cattle.

5.

Grazing land as per proportion acceptable in the State.

6.

A reasonable number of Fair Price Shops.

7.

Panchayat Ghars, as appropriate.

8.

Village level Post Offices, as appropriate, with facilities for opening
saving accounts.

9.

Appropriate seed-cum-fertilizer storage facility if needed.

10.

Efforts must be made to provide basic irrigation facilities to the
agricultural land allocated to the resettled families if not from the
irrigation project, then by developing a cooperative or under some
Government scheme or special assistance.

11.

All new villages established for resettlement of the displaced persons
shall be provided with suitable transport facility which must include
public transport facilities through local bus services with the nearby
growth centres/urban localities.

12.

Burial or cremation ground, depending on the caste- communities at
the site and their practices.

13.

Facilities for sanitation, including individual toilet points.

14.

Individual single electric connections (or connection through nonconventional sources of energy like solar energy), for each household
and for public lighting.

15.

Anganwadi‘s providing child and mother supplemental nutritional
services.

16.

School as per the provisions of the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009);

44

(1)

(2)

(3)

17.

Sub-health centre within two kilometres range.

18.

Primary Health Centre as prescribed by the Government of India.

19.

Playground for children.

20.

One community centre for every hundred families.

21.

Places of worship and chowpal/tree platform for every fifty families for
community assembly, of numbers and dimensions consonant with the
affected area.

22.

Separate land must be earmarked for traditional tribal institutions.

23.

The forest dweller families must be provided, where possible, with
their forest rights on non-timber forest produce and common property
resources, if available close to the new place of settlement and, in case
any such family can continue their access or entry to such forest or
common property in the area close to the place of eviction, they must
continue to enjoy their earlier rights to the aforesaid sources of
livelihood.

24.

Appropriate security arrangements must be provided for the settlement,
if needed.

25.

Veterinary service centre as per norms.

NOTE.– Details of each component of infrastructural amenities mentioned under column (2) against
serial numbers 1 to 25 should be indicated by the acquirer of land under column (3).

45

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 105)
LIST OF ENACTMENTS REGULATING LAND ACQUISITION AND REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT
1. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958).
2. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962).
3. The Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948 (14 of 1948).
4. The Indian Tramways Act, 1886 (11 of 1886)
5. The Land Acquisition (Mines) Act, 1885 (18 of 1885).
6. The Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 (33 of 1978).
7. The National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956).
8. The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act, 1962 (50 of
1962).
9. The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 (30 of 1952).
10. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948 (60 of 1948).
11. The Coal Bearing Areas Acquisition and Development Act, 1957 (20 of 1957).
12. The Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003).
13. The Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989).

–––––––

46

THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1957
_________

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
__________
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Appointment of competent authority.
4. Preliminary notification respecting intention to prospect for coal in any area and powers of
competent authorities thereupon.
5. Effect of notification on prospecting licences and mining leases.
6. Compensation for any necessary damage done under section 4.
7. Power to acquire land or rights in or over land notified under section 4.
8. Objections to acquisition.
9. Declaration of acquisition.
9A. Special powers in cases of urgency.
10. Vesting of land or rights in Central Government.
11. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of land or rights in a Government company.
12. Power to take possession of land acquired.
13. Compensation for prospecting licences ceasing to have effect, rights under mining leases being
acquired, etc.
14. Method of determining compensation.
15. Costs.
16. Interest on awards.
17. Payment of compensation.
18. Prospecting and mining to be done by Central Government in conformity with the Mineral
Concession Rules.
18A. Payment to State Governments in lieu of royalty.
19. Power to delegate.
20. Appeals.
21. Power to obtain information.
22. Power to enter and inspect.
23. Penalties.
24. Service of notices and orders.
25. Protection of action taken in good faith.
26. Jurisdiction of civil courts.
27. Power to make rules.
28. Notifications under Act 1 of 1894 in which proceedings are pending to be treated as notifications
under this Act.

1

THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1957
ACT NO. 20 OF 1957
[8th June, 1957.]

An Act to establish in the economic interest of India greater public control over the coal mining
industry and its development by providing for the acquisition by the State of unworked land
containing or likely to contain coal deposits or of rights in or over such land, for the
extinguishment or modification of such rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease,
licence or otherwise, and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir*.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “competent authority” means any person appointed to be a competent authority under
section 3;
(b) “Government company” means a Government company as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), in which any land or rights in or over land shall have vested under
section 11;
(c) “Mineral Concession Rules” means the rules for the time being in force made under the Mines
and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (53 of 1948);
[(cc) “mining lease” includes a mining sub-lease, and “lessee” shall be construed accordingly;]

2

(d) the expression “person interested” includes all persons claiming an interest in compensation to
be made on account of the acquisition of land, or of the acquisition, extinguishment or modification
of any rights in or over land, under this Act;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “Tribunal” means the Tribunal constituted under section 14.
3. Appointment of competent authority.—The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint any person to be the competent authority for the purposes of this Act; and
different persons may be appointed as competent authorities for different provisions of this Act and for
different areas.
4. Preliminary notification respecting intention to prospect for coal in any area and powers of
competent authorities thereupon.—(1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government that coal is
likely to be obtained from land in any locality, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, give notice
of its intention to prospect for coal therein.
(2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall give a brief description of the land and state its
approximate area.
(3) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the competent authority
and for his servants and workmen—
(a) to enter upon and survey any land in such locality;
(b) to dig or bore into the sub-soil;
1. 12th June, 1957, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 1931 (E), dated 10th June, 1957, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, sec. 3(i).
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.

2

(c) to do all other acts necessary to prospect for coal in the land;
(d) to set out the boundaries of the land in which prospecting is proposed to be done and the
intended line of the work, if any, proposed to be made thereon;
(e) to mark such boundaries and line by placing marks; and
(f) where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the boundaries and line marked, to cut
down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle:
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or garden attached to
a dwelling house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such
occupier at least seven days’ notice in writing of his intention to do so.
(4) In issuing a notification under this section the Central Government shall exclude therefrom that
portion of any land in which coal mining operations are actually being carried on in conformity with the
provisions of any enactment, rule or order for the time being in force or any premises on which any
process ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of coal obtained as a result of such
operations is being carried on are situate.
5. Effect of notification on prospecting licences and mining leases.—On the issue of a notification
under sub-section (1) of section 4 in respect of any land—
(a) any prospecting licence 1[which authorises any person] to prospect for coal or any other
mineral in the land shall cease to have effect; and
(b) any mining lease 2*** shall, in so far as it authorises the lessee or any person claiming
through him to undertake any operation in the land, cease to have effect for so long as the notification
under that sub-section is in force.
6. Compensation for any necessary damage done under section 4.—(1) Whenever any action of
the nature described in sub-section (3) of section 4 is to be taken, the competent authority shall, before or
at the time such action is taken, pay or tender payment for all necessary damage which is likely to be
caused, and in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered or as to the person to
whom it should be paid or tendered, he shall at once refer the dispute to the decision of the Central
Government, and the decision of the Central Government shall be final.
(2) The fact that there exists any such dispute as is referred to in this section shall not be a bar to
action under sub-section (3) of section 4.
7. Power to acquire land or rights in or over land notified under section 4.—(1) If the Central
Government is satisfied that coal is obtainable in the whole or any part of the land notified under
sub-section (1) of section 4, it may, within a period of two years from the date of the said notification or
within such further period not exceeding one year in the aggregate as the Central Government may
specify in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, give notice of its intention to acquire the
whole or any part of the land or of any rights in or over such land, as the case may be.
(2) If no notice to acquire the land or any rights in or over such land is given under sub-section (1)
within the period allowed thereunder, the notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall cease
to have effect on the expiration of three years from the date thereof.
8. Objections to acquisition.—(1) Any person interested in any land in respect of which a
notification under section 7 has been issued may, within thirty days of the issue of the notification, object
to the acquisition of the whole or any part of the land or of any rights in or over such land.
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 3, for “granted to any person under the Mineral Concession Rules which authorises
him” (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).
2. The words “granted to any person under the Mineral Concession Rules” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).

3

Explanation.—It shall not be an objection within the meaning of this section for any person to say
that he himself desires to undertake mining operations in the land for the production of coal and that such
operations should not be undertaken by the Central Government or by any other person.
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the competent authority in writing, and the
competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of being heard either in person or by a legal
practitioner and shall, after hearing all such objections and after making such further inquiry, if any,
as he thinks necessary, 1[either make a report in respect of the land which has been notified under
sub-section (1) of section 7 or of rights in or over such land, or make different reports in respect of
different parcels of such land or of rights in or over such land, to the Central Government, containing his
recommendations on the objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him, for the
decision of that Government.]
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be interested in land who would be
entitled to claim an interest in compensation if the land or any rights in or over such land were acquired
under this Act.
9. Declaration of acquisition.—(1) When the Central Government is satisfied, after considering the
report, if any, made under section 8 that any land or any rights in or over such land should be acquired, a
declaration shall be made by it to that effect 2[, and different declarations may be made from time to time
in respect of different parcels of any land, or of rights in or over such land, covered by the same
notification under sub-section (1) of section 7, irrespective of whether one report or different reports has
or have been made (wherever required) under sub-section (2) of section 8]:
3

[Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land, or rights in or over such land, covered
by a notification under sub-section (1) of section 7, issued after the commencement of the Coal Bearing
Areas (Acquisition and Development) Amendment and Validation Act, 1971 (54 of 1971), shall be made
after the expiry of three years from the date of the said notification:
Provided further that, where a declaration] relates to any land or to any rights in or over land
belonging to a State Government which has or have not been leased out, no such declaration shall be
made except after previous consultation with the State Government.
(2) 4[Every declaration] shall be published in the Official Gazette, and—
(a) in any case where land is to be acquired, shall state the district or other territorial division in
which the land is situate and its approximate area; and, where a plan shall have been made of the
land, the place where such plan may be inspected;
(b) in any case where rights in or over such land are to be acquired, shall state the nature and
extent of the rights in addition to the matters relating to the land specified in clause (a); and
a copy of every such declaration shall be sent to the State Government concerned.
5

[9A. Special powers in cases of urgency.—If the Central Government is satisfied that it is
necessary to acquire immediately the whole or any part of the land notified under sub-section (1) of
section 4 or any rights in or over such land, the Central Government may direct that the provisions of
section 8 shall not apply, and if it does so direct, a declaration may be made under section 9 in respect
thereof at any time after the issue of the notification under section 7.]
10. Vesting of land or rights in Central Government.—(1) On the publication in the Official
Gazette of the declaration under section 9, the land or the rights in or over the land, as the case may be,
shall vest absolutely in the Central Government 6[free from all encumbrances].
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1971, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f 11-12-1971).
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Provided that, where the declaration” (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “The declaration” (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).
5. Ins. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 4 (w.e.f 12-6-1957).
6. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).

4

(2) Where the rights under any mining lease 1[granted or deemed to have been granted by a State
Government] to any person are acquired under this Act, the Central Government shall, on and from the
date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of the State Government as if a mining lease
under the Mineral Concession Rules had been granted by the State Government to the Central
Government, the period thereof being the entire period for which such a lease could have been granted by
the State Government under those rules.
11. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of land or rights in a Government
company.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, the Central Government may, if it is
satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and
conditions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, direct, by order in writing, that the land or
the rights in or over the land, as the case may be, shall, instead of vesting in the Central Government
under section 10 or continuing to so vest, vest in the Government company either on the date of
publication of the declaration or on such other date as may be specified in the direction.
(2) Where the rights under any mining lease acquired under this Act vest in a Government company
under sub-section (1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to
have become the lessee of the State Government as if a mining lease under the Mineral Concession Rules
had been granted by the State Government to the Government company, the period thereof being the
entire period for which such a lease could have been granted by the State Government under those rules;
and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to the lease or the land covered by it
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the
Government company.
12. Power to take possession of land acquired.—The competent authority may, by notice in
writing, require any person in possession of any land acquired under this Act to surrender or deliver
possession of the land within such period as may be specified in the notice, and if a person refuses or fails
to comply with any such notice, the competent authority may enter upon and take possession of the land,
and for that purpose may use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.
13. Compensation for prospecting licences ceasing to have effect, rights under mining leases
being acquired, etc.—(1) Where a prospecting licence ceases to have effect under section 5, there shall
be paid to the person interested compensation, the amount of which shall be a sum made up of all items of
reasonable and bona fide expenditure actually incurred in respect of the land, that is to say,—
(i) the expenditure incurred in obtaining the licence;
(ii) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the preparation of maps, charts and other
documents relating to the land, the collection from the land of cores or other mineral samples and the
due analysis thereof and the preparation of any other relevant records or material;
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the construction of roads or other essential
works on the land, if such roads or works are in existence and in a usable condition;
(iv) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of any other operation necessary for prospecting
carried out in the land.
(2) Where the rights under a mining lease are acquired under this Act, there shall be paid to the
person interested compensation, the amount of which shall be a sum made up of the following items,
namely,—
(i) if the lease was granted after prospecting operations had been carried out in respect of the land
under a prospecting licence, the sum of all items of reasonable and bona fide expenditure actually
incurred with respect to the matters specified in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of sub-section (1) before
the date of the lease:

1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 5, for “granted by a State Government” (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).

5

Provided that where two or more leases had been granted in relation to any land covered
previously by one prospecting licence, only so much of the expenditure aforesaid as bears to the total
expenditure the same proportion as the area under the mining lease in respect of which the rights have
been acquired bears to the total area covered by the mining leases shall be payable under this clause;
(ii) any reasonable and bona fide expenditure of the nature referred to in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii)
of sub-section (1) actually incurred in relation to the lease, together with the salami, if any, paid for
obtaining the lease;
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred by way of payment of dead-rent or minimum royalty during
any year or years when there was no production of coal;
(iv) interest on any such expenditure referred to in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) as has actually been
incurred 1[up to] the year in which the rights under the lease are acquired, interest being calculated in
the following manner, that is to say,—
interest at the rate of five per centum per annum in respect of the expenditure incurred during
each calendar year for the first five years commencing from the year in which such expenditure
was incurred plus interest at the rate of four per centum per annum in respect of each subsequent
year after the expiration of the first five years and ending with the year in which the rights under
the lease are acquired:
Provided that the total sum payable under this clause shall not exceed one-half of the total amount
referred to in 2[clauses (i), (ii) and (iii)].
(3) Where the rights under a mining lease acquired under section 9 relate only to a part of the land
covered by the mining lease, the amount of compensation payable shall be such as bears to the total
compensation which would have been payable if the rights of the mining lessee in respect of the entire
land had been acquired, the same proportion which the area of the land in respect of which the rights are
acquired bears to the total area of the land covered by the mining lease.
(4) Where a mining lease ceases to have effect for any period under clause (b) of section 5, there shall
be paid by way of compensation for the period during which the lease so ceased to have effect, a sum
equivalent to five per centum of any such expenditure as is referred to in clauses (i) and (iii) of
sub-section (2) for each year during which the lease remains suspended.
(5) Where any land is acquired under section 9, there shall be paid compensation to the person
interested the amount of which shall be determined after taking into consideration—
(a) the market value of the land at the date of the publication of the notification under
sub-section (1) of section 4;
Explanation.—The value of any minerals lying in the land shall not be taken into consideration in
determining the market value of any land;
(b) the damage sustained by the person interested, by reason of the taking of any standing crops
or trees which may be on the land at the time of the taking possession thereof;
(c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested, at the time of taking possession of the
land, by reason of severing such land from other land;
(d) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested, at the time of taking possession of the
land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable property in any other
manner, or his earnings;
(e) if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land, the person interested is compelled to change
his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such change; and

1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 6, for “during the period commencing from the date of the lease and ending with” (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “clauses (ii) and (iii)” (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).

6

(f) the damage, if any, bona fide resulting from diminution of the profits of the land between the
time of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 4 and the time of the
publication of the declaration under sub-section (2) of section 9.
1

[(5A) In determining the amount of compensation for any land acquired under section 9, any increase
to the value of the other land of the person interested, likely to accrue from the use to which the land
acquired will be put shall not be taken into consideration.]
(6) Where any operation carried on by or on behalf of the Central Government in the exercise of any
powers conferred by this Act causes or is likely to cause damage to the surface of any land or any works
thereon and in respect thereof no provision for compensation is made elsewhere in this Act, the competent
authority shall pay or tender payment for all such damage, and, in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of
the amount so paid or tendered or as to the person to whom it is to be paid or tendered, he shall refer the
dispute to the decision of the Tribunal.
(7) No compensation under this section in relation to maps, charts and other documents shall be paid
unless the person to whom it is payable has delivered to the prescribed authority all the maps, charts and
other documents.
14. Method of determining compensation.—(1) Where the amount of any compensation payable
under this Act can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance with such agreement.
(2) Where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Government shall constitute a Tribunal
consisting of a person who is or has been or is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court for the purpose of
determining the amount.
(3) The Central Government may in any particular case nominate a person having expert knowledge
in mining to assist the Tribunal, and where such nomination is made, the person or persons interested may
also nominate any other person for the same purpose.
(4) At the commencement of the proceedings before the Tribunal the Central Government and the
person interested shall state what in their respective opinions is a fair amount of compensation.
(5) The Tribunal shall after hearing the dispute, make an award determining the amount of
compensation which appears to it to be just, and specify the person or persons to whom the compensation
shall be paid; and in making the award the Tribunal shall have regard to the circumstances of each case
and to the foregoing provisions of this Act with respect to the manner in which the amount of
compensation shall be determined in so far as the said provisions or any of them may be applicable.
(6) Where there is a dispute as to the person or persons entitled to compensation and the Tribunal
finds that more persons than one are entitled to compensation, it shall apportion the amount thereof
among such persons and in such manner as it thinks fit.
(7) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), shall apply to any proceedings under this
section.
2

[(8) The Tribunal, in the proceedings before it, shall have all the powers which a civil court has
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(iii) reception of evidence on affidavits;
(iv) requisitioning any public record from any court or office; and
(v) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.]
15. Costs.—Every award made by the Tribunal shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the
proceedings before it and by what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).

7

16. Interest on awards.—If the sum which in the opinion of the Tribunal ought to have been
awarded as compensation is in excess of the sum which the Central Government has stated to be a fair
amount of compensation, the award of the Tribunal may direct that the Central Government shall pay
interest on such excess at the rate of five per centum per annum from the date on which it became payable
to the date of payment of such excess.
17. Payment of compensation.—(1) Any compensation payable under this Act may be tendered or
paid to the persons interested entitled thereto, and the Central Government shall pay it to them unless
prevented by some one or more of the contingencies mentioned in sub-section (2).
(2) If the persons interested entitled thereto shall not consent to receive it or if there be any dispute as
to the sufficiency of the amount of compensation or the title to receive it or the apportionment thereof, the
Central Government shall deposit the amount of compensation with the Tribunal:
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such payment under protest as to the
sufficiency of the amount:
1

[Provided further that every person who claims to be an interested person (whether such person has
been admitted to be interested or not) including the person referred to in the preceding proviso shall be
entitled to prefer a claim for compensation before the Tribunal:
Provided also that no person who has received the amount otherwise than under protest shall be
entitled to prefer any such claim before the Tribunal.]
(3) When the amount of compensation is not paid or deposited as required by this section, the Central
Government shall be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate of five per centum per annum from the time
the compensation became due until it shall have been so paid or deposited.
18. Prospecting and mining to be done by Central Government in conformity with the Mineral
Concession Rules.—Where prospecting is done under this Act by or on behalf of the Central
Government in any land situate within the jurisdiction of a State Government or where the Central
Government or a Government company has become the lessee of a State Government in respect of any
land under this Act, the terms and conditions under which the prospecting can be done or rights under the
lease exercised shall, as far as may be, be the same as the terms and conditions applicable to prospecting
licences and mining leases under the Mineral Concession Rules; and in case of doubt or dispute, shall be
settled by arbitration or in such other manner as the Central Government and the State Government may
decide.
2

[18A. Payment to State Governments in lieu of royalty.—Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act, where any land or any rights in or over land belonging to a State Government (other than the
rights under a mining lease granted or deemed to have been granted by the State Government to any
person) vest in the Central Government under section 10 or in a Government Company under section 11,
the Central Government or the Company, as the case may be, may pay to the State Government such sum
of money as would have been payable as royalty by a lessee had such land or rights been under a mining
lease granted by the State Government.]
19. Power to delegate.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct
that all or any of the powers or duties which may be exercised or discharged by it under this Act shall, in
such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised
or discharged also by any person specified in this behalf in the notification and any such person may, with
the previous approval of the Central Government, by order in writing, direct that any power or duty which
has been directed to be exercised or discharged by him shall, in such circumstances and under such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercised or discharged by any such person
subordinate to him as may be specified therein.

1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1971, s. 6, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-12-1971).

8

20. Appeals.—(1) Any person aggrieved by any award of the Tribunal under section 14 may, within
thirty days from the date of such award, prefer an appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the
land or some portion of the land which has been acquired or the land or some portion of the land covered
by a prospecting licence or by a mining lease in respect of which mining rights have been acquired is
situate.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a competent authority or by any other person in virtue
of any powers exercisable by him under this Act may, within twenty-one days from the date of the order,
prefer an appeal to the Central Government.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the Central Government may, after calling for a
report from the competent authority of person concerned, and giving an opportunity to the parties to be
heard, and after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such orders as it thinks fit, and the
order of the Central Government shall be final.
(4) Where an appeal is preferred under sub-section (2), the Central Government may stay the
enforcement of the order of the competent authority or person concerned for such period and on such
conditions as it thinks fit.
21. Power to obtain information.—The Central Government or any person authorised in writing by
it in this behalf may, by order in writing, require any person to furnish to such authority as may be
specified in the order such information in his possession as may be required relating to any property in
respect of which action is proposed to be taken under this Act.
22. Power to enter and inspect.—The competent authority, or any person authorised in writing by it
in this behalf, by general or special order, may enter and inspect any property for the purpose of
determining whether and, if so, in what manner an order under this Act should be made in relation to any
property or with a view to securing compliance with any order made under this Act.
23. Penalties.—Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorised by
sub-section (3) of section 4 or wilfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces any mark made under
section 4, or wilfully obstructs the lawful exercise of any other power conferred by or under this Act, or
fails to comply with any order made or direction given under this Act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
24. Service of notices and orders.—Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, every
notice or order issued or made under this Act shall—
(a) in the case of a notice or order of a general nature or affecting a number of persons, be
notified in the Official Gazette and also published in the locality in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(b) in the case of a notice or order directed to an individual 1[be served on such individual],—
(i) wherever it is practicable to do so by delivering or tendering it to that individual; or
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the door or some other
conspicuous part of the residence in which that individual lives, and a written report thereof shall
be prepared and witnessed by two persons living in the neighbourhood; or
(iii) failing service by these means, by post.
25. Protection of action taken in good faith.—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the Central Government or any person for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 26-12-1960).

9

(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the competent
authority or any other person for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
26. Jurisdiction of civil courts.—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no civil court
shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Central Government or the competent authority
or any other person is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
27. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure to be followed in making any inquiry under this Act;
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in proceedings under section 14;
(c) the form and manner in which appeals to the Central Government may be made under this
Act; and
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
1

[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.]
28. Notifications under Act 1 of 1894 in which proceedings are pending to be treated as
notifications under this Act.—(1) Every notification issued before the commencement of this Act,
whether by the Central Government or by a State Government, under section 4 of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), in which lands were stated to be needed for
the prospecting of coal seams for the development of collieries to be worked by the Union of India shall
be deemed to have been issued by the Central Government under section 4 of this Act as if this Act had
been in force on the date of the notification.
(2) Every notification issued before the commencement of this Act, whether by the Central
Government or by a State Government, under section 6 of the said Act in which lands were stated to be
needed for the development of coal shall be deemed to have been issued under section 9 of this Act as if
this Act had been in force on the date of the notification.
(3) Any objection preferred under section 5A of the said Act in respect of any land covered by any
notification issued under section 4 of the said Act shall be deemed to be an objection preferred under
section 8 of this Act to the relevant competent authority and may be 2[disposed of by him as if the
objection had been made in relation to a notification issued under section 7 of this Act 3[in respect of such
land] or of any rights in or over such land; and the Central Government may at any time make a
declaration under section 9 of this Act in respect of the land or any part thereof or any rights in or over
such land or part].

1. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 11-1-2005).
2. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 7, for “disposed of by him accordingly” (w.e.f. 12-6-1957).
3. Subs. by Act 23 of 1969, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 12-8-1969).

10

1

[(3A) Where in respect of any land covered by any notification issued under section 4 of the said Act,
no objection has been preferred under section 5A thereof within the period specified in that section, then
it shall be deemed that a notification had been issued under section 7 of this Act in respect of such land or
of any rights in or over such land and that no objection to the acquisition of the land or any rights in or
over the land had been preferred under section 8 of this Act, and accordingly the Central Government
may at any time make a declaration under section 9 of this Act in respect of the land or any part thereof or
any rights in or over such land or part.]
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the provisions of this Act (including
provisions relating to compensation) shall apply in relation to any such notification as is referred to in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) as they apply in relation to any notification issued under section 4 or
section 9, as the case may be, of this Act.

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-8-1969).

11

THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1973
____________

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
____________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title and commencement.
1A. Declaration as to expediency of Union control.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF COAL MINES
3. Acquisition of rights of owners in respect of coal mines.
3A. Mining operation by company and others.
4. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government.
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of rights in a Government company.
6. Properties vested in the Central Government to be freed from mortgages, etc.
7. Central Government or Government company not to be liable for prior liabilities.

CHAPTER III
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT
8. Payment of amount to owners of coal mines.
9. Payment of further amount.
10. Income derived by the owners of coal mines after the appointed day to be refunded to the Central
Government.

CHAPTER IV
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF COAL MINES
11. Management, etc., of coal mines.
12. Duty of persons in charge of management of coal mines to deliver all assets, etc.
13. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER V
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF COAL MINES
14. Liability of officer or other employee of a coal mine for transfer to any other coal mine.
15. Provident and other funds.
16. Superannuation fund, etc., to be distributed to employees whose employment becomes terminated
under this Act.

1

CHAPTER VI
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS
SECTIONS
17. Commissioner of Payments to be appointed.
18. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.
19. Statement of accounts in respect of the period of management by the Central Government, etc.
19A. Validation of certain collections.
20. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.
21. Priority of claims in relation to arrears of provident fund, etc.
22. Priority in relation to other claims.
23. Admission or rejection of claims.
23A. Application of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act.
24. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.
24A. Interest on admitted claims.
25. Recovery of excess payments made by Central Government or Custodian.
25A. Notice to owners of coal mines and managing contractors, etc.
26. Disbursement of amounts to the owners of coal mines.
27. Undisbursed of unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account.

CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
28. Effect of this Act on other laws.
29. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Government.
30. Penalties.
31. Offences by companies.
32. Mining companies not to be wound up by the court.
33. Delegation of powers.
34. Power to make rules.
35. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.

2

THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1973
ACT NO. 26 OF 1973
[30th May, 1973.]

An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the owners
in respect of the coal mines specified in the Schedule with a view to re-organising and
reconstructing such coal mines so as to ensure the rational, co-ordinated and scientific
development and utilisation of coal resources consistent with the growing requirements of the
country, in order that the ownership and control of such resources are vested in the State and
thereby so distributed as best to subserve the common good, and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines (Nationalisation)
Act, 1973.
(2) The provisions of sections 30 and 31 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of May, 1973.
1

[1A. Declaration as to expediency of Union control.—(1) It is hereby declared that it is expedient
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation and development of coal
mines to the extent hereinafter provided in sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 3 2[, section 3A] and
sub-section (2) of section 30.
(2) The declaration contained in sub-section (1) is in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
declaration contained in section 2 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
(67 of 1957).]
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the 1st day of May, 1973;
(b) “coal mine” means a mine in which there exists one or more seams of coal;
(c) “company” means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),
and includes a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of that Act;
(d) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 17;
(e) “Custodian” means the Custodian appointed under sub-section (2) of section 11, to take over,
or carry on, the management of a coal mine;
(f) “Government company” has the meaning assigned to it by section 617 of the Companies Act,
1956 (1 of 1956);
(g) “managing contractor” means the person, or body of persons, who, with the previous consent,
in writing, of the State Government, has entered into an arrangement, contract or understanding, with
the owner of a coal mine under which the operations of the coal mine are substantially controlled by
such person or body of persons;

1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29-4-1976).
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 2015, s. 28 and Schedule IV (w.e.f. 21-10-2014).

3

(h) “mine” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of searching for or
obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on, and includes—
(i) all borings and bore holes;
(ii) all shafts, whether in the course of being sunk or not;
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven;
(iv) all open cast workings;
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for bringing into or removal from a mine of
minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom;
(vi) all lands, buildings, works, adits, levels, planes, machinery and equipments, instruments,
stores, vehicles, railways, tramways and sidings in, or adjacent to, a mine and used for the
purposes of the mine;
(vii) all workshops (including buildings, machinery, instruments, stores, equipment of such
workshops and the lands on which such workshops stand) in, or adjacent to, a mine and used
substantially for the purposes of the mine or a number of mines under the same management;
(viii) all coal belonging to the owner of the mine, whether in stock or in transit, and all coal
under production in a mine;
(ix) all power stations in a mine or operated primarily for supplying electricity for the purpose
of working the mine or a number of mines under the same management;
(x) all lands, buildings and equipments belonging to the owner of the mine, and in, adjacent to
or situated on the surface of, the mine where the washing of coal obtained from the mine or
manufacture, therefrom, of coke is carried on;
(xi) all lands and buildings [other than those referred to in sub-clause (x)], wherever situated,
if solely used for the location of the management, sale or liaison offices, or for the residence of
officers and staff, of the mine;
1

[(xii) all other fixed assets, movable and immovable, belonging to the owner of a mine,
wherever situated, and current assets, belonging to a mine, whether within its premises or outside.
Explanation.—The expression “current assets” does not include,—
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal products effected at any time before the
appointed day and outstanding immediately before the said day;
(b) dues from the Coal Board, established under section 4 of the Coal Mines
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), prior to the repeal of the
said Act, with respect to any period before the appointed day;
(c) dues from sundry debtors, loans and advances to other parties and investments, not
being investments in the coal mine;
(d) security deposits made by the owners with the Coal Controller appointed by the
Central Government or with the Railways for the fulfilment of contracts or with a State
Electricity Board for the payment of bills;
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the Railways for obtaining contracts;]
(i) “Mineral Concession Rules” means the rules, for the time being in force, made under the
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957);

1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 10, for sub-clause (xii) (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).

4

(j) “mining company” means a company owning a coal mine, and in relation to a foreign
company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the undertaking
of that company in India;
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m) “specified date” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any
provision of this Act, by notification, specify; and different dates may be specified for different
provisions of this Act;
(n) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Coal Mines
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), have the meanings, respectively,
assigned to them in that Act;
(o) words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act or in the Coal Mines
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), but defined in the Mines Act, 1952
(35 of 1952), have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in the Mines Act, 1952.
CHAPTER II
ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF COAL MINES
3. Acquisition of rights of owners in respect of coal mines.—(1) On the appointed day, the right,
title and interest of the owners in relation to the coal mines specified in the Schedule shall stand
transferred to, and shall vest absolutely in, the Central Government free from all incumbrances.
1

*

*

*

*

*

2

[(3) On and from the commencement of section 3 of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Amendment
Act, 1976 (67 of 1976),—
(a) no person, other than—
(i) the Central Government or a Government, company or a corporation owned, managed or
controlled by the Central Government, or
(ii) a person to whom a sub-lease, referred to in the proviso to clause (c), has been granted by
any such Government, company or corporation, or
3

[(iii) a company engaged in—
(1) the production of iron and steel,
(2) generation of power,
(3) washing of coal obtained from a mine, or
(4) such other end use as the Central Government may, by notification, specify,]

shall carry on coal mining operation, in India, in any form;
(b) excepting the mining leases granted before such commencement in favour of the Government,
company or corporation, referred to in clause (a), and any sub-lease granted by any such Government,
company or corporation, all other mining leases and sub-leases in force immediately before such
commencement, shall, in so far as they relate to the winning or mining of coal, stand terminated;

1. Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 57 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-6-1973).
2. Ins. by Act 67 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-4-1976).
3. Subs. by Act 47 of 1993, s. 2, for sub-clause (iii) (w.e.f. 9-6-1993).

5

(c) no lease for winning or mining coal shall be granted in favour of any person other than the
Government, company or corporation, referred to in clause (a):
Provided that the Government, company or corporation to whom a lease for winning or mining
coal has been granted may grant a sub-lease to any person in any area on such terms and conditions as
may be specified in the instrument granting the sub-lease, if the Government, company or corporation
is satisfied that—
(i) the reserves of coal in the area are in isolated small pockets or are not sufficient for
scientific and economical development in a co-ordinated and integrated manner, and
(ii) the coal produced by the sub-lessee will not be required to be transported by rail.
(4) Where a mining lease stands terminated under sub-section (3), it shall be lawful for the Central
Government or a Government, company or corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government
to obtain, 1*** a prospecting licence or a mining lease in respect of the whole or part of the land covered
by the mining lease which stands so terminated.]
2

[(5) If, after the appointed day, the Central Government is satisfied, whether from any information
received by it or otherwise, that there has been any error, omission or misdescription in relation to the
particulars of a coal mine included in the Schedule or the name and address of the owner of any such coal
mine, it may, by notification, correct such error, omission or misdescription and on the issue of such
notification, the relevant entries in the Schedule shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been,
corrected accordingly:
Provided that no such correction in relation to the ownership of a coal mine shall be made where such
ownership is in dispute.]
3

[3A. Mining operation by company and others.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, any person being—
(a) a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company
or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or
any other company incorporated in India; or
(b) a company or a joint venture company formed by two or more companies,
may carry on coal mining operations in India, in any form either for own consumption, sale or for any
other purpose in accordance with the prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be.
(2) The Central Government may, with a view to rationalise such coal mines so as to ensure the
coordinated and scientific development and utilisation of coal resources consistent with the growing
requirements of the country, from time to time, prescribe—
(i) the coal mines or coal bearing areas and their location;
(ii) the minimum size of the coal mine or coal bearing areas;
(iii) such other conditions,
which in the opinion of that Government may be necessary for the purpose of coal mining operations
or mining for sale by a company.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “company” means a company as defined in clause
(20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).]

1. Certain words, brackets and figures omitted by 57 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
2. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
3. Ins. by Act 11 of 2015, s. 28 and Schedule IV (w.e.f. 21-10-2014).

6

4. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government.—(1) Where the rights of an
owner under any mining lease granted, or deemed to have been granted, in relation to a coal mine, by a
State Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government under section 3, the Central
Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of the State
Government or such other person, as the case may be, in relation to such coal mine 1[as if a fresh mining
lease] in relation to such coal mine had been granted to the Central Government and the period of such
lease shall be 2[the maximum period] for which such lease could have been granted by the State
Government or such other person under the Mineral Concession Rules, and thereupon all the rights under
such mining lease, including surface, underground and other rights granted to the lessee shall be deemed
to have been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government.
(2) On the expiry of the term of any lease, referred to in sub-section (1), such lease shall, if so desired
by the Central Government, be renewed, 3*** by the lessor, for the maximum period for which such lease
can be renewed under the Mineral Concession Rules.
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of rights in a Government company.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied
that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that
Government may think fit to impose, direct, by an order in writing, that the right, title and interest of an
owner in relation to a coal mine referred to in section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central
Government, vest in the Government company either on the date of publication of the direction or on such
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day), as may be specified in the direction.
(2) Where the right, title and interest of an owner in relation to a coal mine vest in a Government
company under sub-section (1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be
deemed to have become the lessee in relation to such coal mine as if a mining lease in relation to the coal
mine had been granted to the Government company and the period of such lease shall be the entire period
for which such lease could have been granted under the Mineral Concession Rules; and all the rights and
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such coal mine shall, on and from the date of such
vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall apply to a lease which vests in a Government
company as they apply to a lease vested in the Central Government and references therein to the “Central
Government” shall be construed as references to the Government company.
6. Properties vested in the Central Government to be freed from mortgages, etc.—(1) All
property which vests in the Central Government or in a Government company under this Chapter shall, by
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all
other incumbrances affecting it and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting
the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
(2) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government or a
Government company, and every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in or in relation to any
such property shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the
Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in
sub-section (1) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to any, such
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified in relation to such property in the

1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 12, for “as if a mining lease” (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
2. Subs. by s.12, ibid., for “the entire period” (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
3. Certain words omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).

7

Schedule, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property
which has vested in the Central Government or the Government company.
7. Central Government or Government company not to be liable for prior liabilites.—(1) Every
liability of the owner, agent, manager or managing contractor of a coal mine, in respect of any period
prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of such owner, agent, manager or managing contractor, as
the case may be, and shall be enforceable against him and not against the Central Government or the
Government company.
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that—
(a) save as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Act, no claim for wages, bonus, royalty, rate,
rent, taxes, provident fund, pension, gratuity or any other dues in relation to a coal mine in respect of
any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the
Government company;
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to any coal mine
passed after the appointed day, but in relation to any matter, claim or dispute which arose before that
day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the Government company;
(c) no liability for the contravention, before the appointed day, of any provision of law for the
time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the Government
company.
CHAPTER III
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT
8. Payment of amount to owners of coal mines.—1[(1)] The owner of every coal mine or group of
coal mines specified in the second column of the Schedule, shall be given by the Central Government, in
cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, for the vesting in it, under section 3, of the right, title and
interest of the owner in relation to such coal mine or group of coal mines, an amount equal to the amount
specified against it in the corresponding entry in the fifth column of the Schedule.
2

[(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount specified in the fifth column of
the Schedule against any coal mine or group of coal mines specified in the second column of the said
Schedule and required to be given by the Central Government to its owner under sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to include, and deemed always to have included, the amount required to be paid to such owner in
respect of all coal in stock or other assets referred to in clause (h) of section 2 on the date immediately
before the appointed day and no further amount shall be payable to the owner in respect of such coal or
other assets.]
9. Payment of further amount.—(1) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions
of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall be given by the Central Government, in cash, to the owner of every coal
mine or group of coal mines specified in the Schedule, an amount equal to the amount which would have
been, but for the provisions of the said sections 3, 4 and 5, payable to such owner under the Coal Mines
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), for the period commencing on the 1st day of May,
1973, and ending on the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President.
(2) In addition to the amount referred to in sub-section (1), there shall be given by the Central
Government, in cash, to the owner of every coal mine or group of coal mines specified in the Schedule,
simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum on the amount specified against such owner in the
corresponding entry in the fifth column of the Schedule for the period commencing on the date on which

1. Section 8 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 57 of 1986, s. 13 (w.e.f.1-5-1973).
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).

8

this Act receives the assent of the President and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is
made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.
(3) The amounts referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall be in addition to the amount
specified in the Schedule.
10. Income derived by the owners of coal mines after the appointed day to be refunded to the
Central Government.—(1) Where, in pursuance of any decree, order or injunction of a court or
otherwise, the Central Government or the Custodian appointed under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of
Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), was prevented from taking over the management of any coal mine,
the owner of such coal mine shall render, within sixty days from the date on which management of the
coal mine is delivered to the Central Government or Government company, as the case may be, accounts
in relation to the period commencing on the date of commencement of the said Act and ending on the date
of delivery of such management to the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may
be, with regard to the—
(a) assets and stores of the coal mine acquired or sold by him during the said period;
(b) coal sold or despatched during the said period;
(c) income derived by him from the coal mine during the said period.
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub-section (1), any income is found to have been
derived by the owner from the coal mine during the period referred to in that sub-section, such income
shall be recoverable by the Central Government from the amount payable under section 8 to the owner of
such coal mine, and, the debt due to the Central Government on this account shall rank as an unsecured
debt.
(3) If no account is rendered by the owner of a coal mine within the period referred to in
sub-section (1) or if the Central Government or the Government company has any reason to believe that
the account rendered by such owner is incorrect or false in material particulars, the Central Government
or the Government company may refer the matter to the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner
shall determine the income derived by the owner from the coal mine during the period referred to in
sub-section (1), and take steps to recover the said income from the amount payable to the owner of the
coal mine under section 8, as if the debt due to the Central Government on this account were an unsecured
debt.
(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance in relation to a coal mine or any asset thereof
shall be binding on the Central Government or the Government company if such mortgage, charge, lien or
other incumbrance was created, at any time during the period in which the Central Government or the
Custodian was prevented, by any decree, order or injunction of a court or otherwise, from taking over the
management of the said coal mine.
CHAPTER IV
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF COAL MINES
11. Management, etc., of coal mines.—(1) The general superintendence, direction, control and
management of the affairs and business of a coal mine, the right, title and interest of an owner in relation
to which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall,—
(a) in the case of a coal mine in relation to which a direction has been made by the Central
Government under sub-section (1) of section 5, vest in the Government company specified in such
direction, or
(b) in the case of a coal mine in relation to which no such direction has been made by the Central
Government, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central Government under
sub-section (2),

9

and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so appointed, as the case may be,
shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the owner of the coal mine is
authorised to exercise and do.
(2) The Central Government may appoint an individual or a Government company as the Custodian
of a coal mine in relation to which no direction has been made by it under sub-section (1) of section 5.
12. Duty of persons in charge of management of coal mines to deliver all assets, etc.—(1) On the
vesting of the management of a coal mine in a Government company or on the appointment of a
Custodian, all persons in charge of the management of such coal mine immediately before such vesting or
appointment, shall be bound to deliver to the Government company or the Custodian, as the case may be,
all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their custody relating to the coal mine.
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances
of the case to the Government company or Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and the
Government company or Custodian may also, if it or he so desires, apply to the Central Government at
any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the coal mine shall be conducted
by it or him or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management.
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the coal mine, in relation to which he or it is the
Custodian, such remuneration as the Central Government may fix and shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Central Government.
13. Accounts and audit.—The Custodian of every coal mine shall maintain the accounts of such
mine in such manner and under such conditions as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF COAL MINES
1

[14. Liability of officer or other employee of a coal mine for transfer to any other coal mine.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any other law
for the time being in force, the services of any officer or other employee employed in a coal mine shall be
liable to be transferred to any other coal mine and such transfer shall not entitle such officer or other
employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.]
15. Provident and other funds.—(1) Where a coal mine has established a provident fund,
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of its employees, the monies relatable to the
employees, whose services have become transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or a
Government company shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central
Government or the Government company, as the case may be.
(2) The monies which stand transferred, under sub-section (1), to the Central Government or a
Government company shall be dealt with by that Government or company, as the case may be, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
16. Superannuation fund, etc., to be distributed to employees whose employment becomes
terminated under this Act.—Where the employment of an employee stands terminated by reason of
sub-section (3) of section 14 and such employee is not employed by the owner of the coal mine in any of
his other establishments, such owner shall pay to such employee the amount standing at his credit in the
provident fund and also pay him the amounts due to him as superannuation, welfare and other benefits
admissible to him as if the employee had superannuated or his service with the coal mine had terminated
on the day immediately preceding the specified date.

1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 14, for section 14 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).

10

CHAPTER VI
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS
17. Commissioner of Payments to be appointed.—(1) For the purpose of disbursing the amounts
payable to the owner of each coal mine or group of coal mines, the Central Government shall appoint
such person as it may think fit to be the Commissioner of Payments.
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons to also
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and different persons may be
authorised to exercise different powers.
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in
the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that person directly by this
Act and not by way of authorisation.
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
18. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.—(1) The Central Government
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner for payment to the
owner of a coal mine, an amount equal to the amount specified against the coal mine in the Schedule and
shall also pay to the Commissioner such sums as may be due to the owner of a coal mine under section 9.
(2) In addition to the sum referred to in sub-section (1), the Central Government shall pay, in cash, to
the Commissioner, such amount as may become due to the owner of a coal mine in relation to
1
[the period] during which the management of the coal mine remains vested in the Central Government
2
[, and simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum on such amount for the period commencing
on the 1st day of July, 1975 and ending on the date of payment of such amount to the Commissioner].
(3) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government, in favour of the Commissioner, in
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account in the Public Account of India, and thereafter
the said deposit account shall be operated by the Commissioner.
(4) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of each coal mine in relation
to which payments have been made to him under this Act.
(5) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in
sub-section (3) shall ensure to the benefit of the owners of coal mines 2[and shall also be payable to the
Commissioner in addition to the sum referred to in sub-section (1)].
(6) References in this section to the owner of a coal mine shall, in relation to a group of coal mines
specified in the Schedule, be construed as references to the owner of that group of coal mines.
19. Statement of accounts in respect of the period of management by the Central Government,
etc.—(1) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall cause the books
in relation to each coal mine, the management of which has vested in it under the Coal Mines (Taking
Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), to be closed and balanced as on the date immediately
before the appointed day, and shall cause a statement of accounts, as on that day, to be prepared, within
such time, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, in relation to each such mine in respect
of the transactions effected by it during the period for which the management of such coal mine remained
vested in it:

1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 11, for “any period, after the appointed day,” (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).
2. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).

11

Provided that where two or more coal mines were owned, before the commencement of this Act, by
the same owner, a consolidated statement of accounts may be prepared for all the coal mines owned by
such owner.
(2) All amounts received by the Central Government or the Government company after the closure of
such accounts shall, where such accounts relate to transactions effected before the appointed day, be
included in the said statement of accounts in respect of the coal mine to which the said receipt relates.
(3) The Central Government or the Government company in which the right, title and interest of coal
mine stand vested shall be entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other
persons, any money, due to the coal mine, realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that the
realisations pertain to a period prior to the appointed day:
Provided that where such realisations have not been included in the statement of accounts as on the
day immediately before the appointed day, a supplementary statement of accounts shall be prepared and
furnished, at such intervals as may be prescribed, by the Central Government or the Government
company to the owner of the coal mine.
1

[(4) The liabilities of the coal mine (not being liabilities arising out of advances made by the Central
Government or the Government company), which could not be discharged by the appointed day, may be
discharged by the Central Government or the Government company up to the specified date out of the
realisations effected before or after the appointed day or out of advances or borrowings made up to the
specified date and every payment so made shall be included in the statement of accounts as on the date
immediately before the appointed day indicating therein the period in relation to which the payments were
made and the payments so made shall not be called in question in any court:
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period prior to the appointed day, which have not been
discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the owner of the coal mine.]
(5) A copy of each statement of accounts prepared under this section shall be delivered by the Central
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, to the Commissioner and also to the
owner:
Provided that where the number of owners is more than one, only one copy of the statement of
accounts shall be given to the owners for the benefit of all of them.
(6) The statement of accounts prepared under this section shall be audited by a person who is
qualified to be appointed as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956), and the auditor so appointed shall receive from the funds of the coal mine, such remuneration as
the Central Government may fix.
(7) The audit of the statement of accounts shall be conducted in such manner as the Central
Government may direct.
2

[(8) The statement of accounts audited under sub-section (6) shall, unless the contrary is proved, be
conclusive proof in respect of every matter entered therein.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “statement of accounts” means a statement in the
form of receipts and payments, and does not include any statement that may be prepared as a result of the
closing and balancing of the books for the preparation of the profit and loss account and balance-sheet or
any statement prepared in accordance with the normal commercial practice.]

1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 16, for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
2. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).

12

1

[19A. Validation of certain collections.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, as
amended by section 10 of the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 (22 of 1978),
any money collected by the Central Government or the Government company during the period
commencing on the appointed day and ending with the date specified under sub-section (3) of section 19
shall be deemed to have been validly collected by the Central Government or the Government company,
as the case may be, and any such money shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of section 19.
(2) Any money collected as aforesaid shall not be called in question in any court of law.]
20. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.—2[(1)] Every person having a claim against the owner
of a coal mine shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further
period of thirty days but not thereafter.
3

[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), claims in relation to a provident fund,
pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for the welfare of the persons employed by the
owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines may be filed on behalf of the persons so employed by the
Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner appointed by the Central Government under section 3C of the
Coal Mines Provident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 (46 of 1948); 4[and claims in
relation to any other matter may be filed on behalf of all or any of the persons so employed or any group
of such persons, by any Trade Union, registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926), or,
where no such claim has been filed by any Trade Union, by the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central)
appointed by the Central Government or any officer subordinate to him;] and the claims so made shall be
deemed to have been made by the persons having a claim against the owner of a coal mine or group of
coal mines:
Provided that no such claim shall be made by the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner 4[or the
Trade Union or the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or any officer subordinate to him,] in relation
to a person who has already made a claim under sub-section (1).]
5

[(3) Where any claim, not being a claim which was time-barred on the 31st day of January, 1973,
was preferred under sub-section (1) within the period specified therefor and was rejected merely on the
ground that such claim was time-barred, such claim shall be deemed not to have been rejected and the
Commissioner shall restore on his file such claim and shall deal with it in the manner specified in
section 23.]
21. Priority of claims in relation to arrears of provident fund, etc.—(1) Every person employed
by the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines may make a claim to the Commissioner to the effect
that the sums deducted under sub-section (4) of section 7 of the Coal Mines (Taking Over of
Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), are not sufficient to meet fully the amount of arrears due to him, on
the appointed day within the meaning of that Act, from the owner of such coal mine or group of coal
mines,—
(a) in relation to a provident fund, pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for
the welfare of the persons employed by the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines, or
(b) as wages,
and that a sum equal to the deficiency may be recovered from the amount specified in the Schedule
against the owner of such coal mine or group of coal mines.

1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 12 (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).
2. Section 20 re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 41 of 1973, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
5. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1975).

13

(2) Where a claim is made under sub-section (1), the Commissioner shall determine the extent of the
deficiency and shall, after such determination, deduct in the first instance, out of the amount paid to him
under section 8, a sum equal to the extent of the deficiency determined by him under this sub-section.
(3) All sums deducted by the Commissioner under sub-section (2) shall, in accordance with such rules
as may be made under this Act, be credited by the Commissioner to the relevant fund or be paid to the
persons to whom such sums are due, and on such credit or payment, the liability of the owner in respect of
all the amounts of arrears due as aforesaid shall stand discharged.
(4) The deductions made by the Commissioner under sub-section (2) shall have priority over all other
debts, whether secured or unsecured.
22. Priority in relation to other claims.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in section 21, every
secured debt due from the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines shall have priority over all other
debts and shall be paid in accordance with the rights and interests of the secured creditors.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be
paid in priority to all other unsecured debts, not being the amounts advanced by the Central Government
or the Custodian appointed under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973),
for the management of the coal mine,—
(a) all sums due to the State Government including royalty and dead rent;
(b) all amounts due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under the
Workmen‟s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect of the death or disablement of any
employee of the coal mine unless such mine has, under such contract with insurers as mentioned in
1
[section 14] of the said Act, rights capable of being transferred to and vested in, the workmen; and
(c) all sums deducted by the employer from the salary or wages of any workman or other
employee for credit to any provident fund, or any other fund established for the welfare of the
employees of the coal mine but not deposited to the credit of the said fund.
(3) The debts specified in sub-section (2) shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full,
unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions and be
paid accordingly.
23. Admission or rejection of claims.—(1) The Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before
which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disbursement
made by the Commissioner.
(2) Not less than fourteen days‟ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language and one issue of the daily newspaper in the regional
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after
giving the owner of the coal mine an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.

1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “section 15” (w.e.f. 26-11-1978).

14

(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of
the discharge of his functions including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as
evidence;
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witness.
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).
1

[(6A) The Commissioner may, on receipt of a claim,—
(a) elect to settle the claim himself; or

(b) transfer the claim for settlement to a person authorised in this behalf under sub-section (2) of
section 17; or
(c) withdraw the claim from the person referred to in clause (b) and either settle the claim himself
or transfer it for disposal to any other person who has been authorised in this behalf under
sub-section (2) of section 17.]
(7) 2[A claimant or owner who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an
appeal, within a period of sixty days from the date of the decision,] to the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the coal mine is situated:
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner,
such appeal shall lie to the High Court for the State in which the coal mine is situated, and such appeal
shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court:
1

[Provided further that any appeal which has not been preferred before the date on which the Coal
Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 (22 of 1978), receives the assent of the President,
shall be preferred within a period of sixty days from such date.]
3

[23A. Application of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act.—The provisions of sections 5 and
12 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals under section 23.]
24. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.—Where, after meeting the claims
admitted by him, of secured creditors, and unsecured creditors having priority under sub-section (2) of
section 22, the total amount of claims of other unsecured creditors admitted by the Commissioner, does
not exceed the total amount of the money credited to the account of a coal mine, every such admitted
claim shall be paid in full and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner, but where such amount is
insufficient to meet in full the total amount of the admitted claims, all such claims shall abate in equal
proportions and be paid accordingly.

1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 14 (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).
3. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).

15

1

[24A. Interest on admitted claims.—Notwithstanding any award, decree or order of any court,
tribunal or other authority, passed before the appointed day, in relation to any coal mine, where any
amount is payable in respect of a claim admitted under this Act, the interest payable on such amount for
any period after the appointed day shall be at such rate not exceeding the rate of interest accruing on any
amount deposited by the Commissioner under section 18.]
2

[25. Recovery of excess payments made by Central Government or Custodian.—Any amount in
excess of payments over receipts in the statement of accounts prepared under section 19 shall be deemed
to be an amount advanced by the Central Government or the Custodian, as the case may be, for the
management of a coal mine during the period in which the management of such coal mine remained
vested in the Central Government and the Central Government may make a claim to the Commissioner
for such excess payment and such claim shall have priority over the claims of all other unsecured
creditors of the coal mine, including those referred to in sub-section (2) of section 22.
Explanation.—In this section. “Custodian” means the Custodian appointed under the Coal Mines
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973).]
3

[25A. Notice to owners of coal mines and managing contractors, etc.—(1) After meeting the
liabilities of persons whose claims have been admitted under this Act, the Commissioner shall notify, in
such manner as he may think fit, the amount of money available with him and specify in such notification
a date within which the owners of the coal mines, the managing contractors and the owners of any
machinery, equipment or other property which has vested in the Central Government or a Government
company under this Act and which does not belong to the owners of the coal mines may apply to him for
payment.
(2) Where any application is made under sub-section (1), the Commissioner shall, after satisfying
himself as to the right of the applicant to receive the whole or any part of the amount, pay the amount to
the person concerned and in the event of therebeing a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person to
receive the whole or any part of the amount, the Commissioner shall deal with the application in the
manner specified in sub-section (2) of section 26.]
26. Disbursement of amounts to the owners of coal mines.—(1) If out of the monies paid to him in
relation to a coal mine or group of coal mines specified in the second column of the Schedule, there is a
balance left after meeting the liabilities of all the secured and unsecured creditors, the Commissioner shall
disburse such balance to the owner of such coal mine or group of coal mines.
(2) Before making any payment to the owner of any coal mine or group of coal mines under
sub-section (1), the Commissioner shall satisfy himself as to the right of such person to receive the whole
or any part of such amount, and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person
to receive the whole or any part of the amount, referred to in sections 8 and 9, the Commissioner shall
refer the matter to the court and make the disbursement in accordance with the decision of the court.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the entries in the fourth column of the
Schedule shall not be deemed to be conclusive as to the right, title and interest of any person in relation to
any coal mine specified in the corresponding entries in the second column of the Schedule and evidence
shall be admissible to establish the right, title and interest of any person in relation to such coal mine.
(4) In relation to a coal mine the operations of which were, immediately before the taking over of the
management of such coal mine under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973
(15 of 1973), under the control of a managing contractor, the amount specified in the fifth column of the
Schedule against such coal mine shall be apportioned between the owner of the coal mine and such
managing contractor in such proportions as may be agreed upon by or between the owner and such

1. Ins. byAct 22 of 1978, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
2. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 17, for section 25 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 17 (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).

16

managing contractor, and in the event of therebeing no such agreement, in such proportions as may be
determined by the court on a reference made to it by the Commissioner.
(5) Where any machinery, equipment or other property in a coal mine has vested in the Central
Government or a Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property
does not belong to the owner of such coal mine, the amount specified in the fifth column of the Schedule
against such coal mine shall, on a reference made to it by the Commissioner, be apportioned by the court
between the owner of such coal mine and the owner of such machinery, equipment or other property
having due regard to the value of such machinery, equipment or other property on the appointed day.
1

[(6) Where the amount specified in the fifth column of the Schedule is relatable to a group of coal
mines, the Commissioner shall have power to apportion such amount among the owners of such group,
and in making such apportionment, the Commissioner shall have regard to the highest annual production
in the coal mine during the three years immediately preceding the appointed day.]
Explanation.—In this section, “court”, in relation to a coal mine, means the principal civil court of
original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the coal mine is situated.
27. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account.—Any
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of 2[three years
from the day on which the last order for disbursement was made], shall be transferred by the
Commissioner to the general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money so
transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall
be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being
treated as an order for the refund of revenue.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
28. Effect of this Act on other laws.—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in consistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court,
tribunal or other authority.
29. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Government.—(1) Every contract entered
into by the owner or occupier of any coal mine for any service, sale or supply and in force immediately
before the appointed day shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and twenty days from the
appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in
writing, by the Central Government and in ratifying such contract the Central Government may make
such alterations or modifications therein as it may think fit:
Provided that the Central Government shall not omit to ratify a contract unless it is satisfied that such
contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the coal
mine.
(2) The Central Government shall not omit to ratify a contract or make any alteration or modification
therein except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract.
30. Penalties.—3[(1)] Any person who,—
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertaking of
any coal mine referred to in the Schedule wrongfully withholds such property from the Central
Government or the Government company, or

1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1-5-1973).
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s.18, for “three years from the last day on which the disbursement was made” (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).
3. Section 30 re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 67 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).

17

(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertaking of
any coal mine specified in the Schedule or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central
Government or any person specified by that Government, any document relating to such coal mine
which may be in his possession, custody or control or fails to deliver to the Custodian any assets,
books of account, registers or other documents in his custody relating to the coal mine in respect of
which a Custodian has been appointed, or
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property of any coal mine or prefers any claim under this
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or grossly inaccurate,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
1

[(2) Any person who engages, or causes any other person to be engaged, in winning or mining coal
from the whole or part of any land in respect of which no valid prospecting licence or mining lease or
sub-lease is in force, shall be punishable 2[with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
and also with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees.]]
31. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
32. Mining companies not to be wound up by the court.—No proceeding for the winding up of a
mining company, the right, title and interest in relation to the coal mine owned by which have vested in
the Central Government or a Government company under this Act or for the appointment of a receiver in
respect of the business of the company, shall lie in any court except with the consent of the Central
Government.
33. Delegation of powers.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised by any person or persons as may be
specified in the notification.
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1), the person to whom such power
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.

1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 19, for certain words (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).

18

34. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry
out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the coal mine shall be managed by a Government company or a
Custodian;
1

[(aa) the coal mines or coal bearing areas and their location, the minimum size of the coal mine
or coal bearing areas, and such other conditions which may be necessary for the purpose of coal
mining operations including mining for sale by a company under sub-section (2) of section 3A.]
(b) the manner in which monies in any provident or other fund referred to in section 15 shall be
dealt with;
(c) the form and manner in which the statement of accounts referred to in section 19 shall be
prepared;
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
35. Power to remove difficulties.—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed
day.

1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2015, s. 28 and Schedule IV (w.e.f. 21-10-2014).

19

THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 3, 8 and 18)
Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine

Amount (in
rupees)

No.
1

2

3

4

5

ASSAM
Jeypore Coalfield
1.

Bimalpore ...

Post Office Sibsagar Bimalpore Collieries Limited, Post Office,
Sibsagar.

4,000

2.

Dilli …

Post Office Banhat,
Sibasagar.

Dilli Collieries Association Limited, Post
Office Tinsukia.

4,000

3.

Jeypore ...

Post Office Namrup

Jeypore Collieries (Private) Limited, Post
Office Namrup.

75,000

Makum Coalfield, Lakhimpur

4. Baragolai ...

Post Office Baragolai Assam Railways and Trading Company
Limited Margherita.

5. Ledo ...

Post Office Ledo

6. Namdang ...

Post Office Baragolai Assam Railways and Trading Company
Limited Margherita.

7. Tipong ...

Post Office Ledo

Assam Railways and Trading Company
Limited, Margherita.

Assam Railways and Trading Company
Limited, Margherita.

*

48,84,000

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 4.
4,000
Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 4.

Mikir Coalfield
8. Koilajan ...

Post Office Koilajan Koilajan Collieries Limited, Post Office
Dimapur, Naga Hills.

38,000

9. Seelvata ...

Post Office Diphu,
District Mikir Hills.

4,000

Hira Padda Dipali Dutta, Shillong.
BIHAR

Daltongani Hutar Coalfield, Palamau
10. Hutar ...

*

Post Office Hutar
Colliery.

Sone Valley Portland Cement Company
Limited, Post Office Japla, Palamau.

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. Nos. 5 and 7.

20

2,98,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

11. Jagaldaga ...

Post Office Latehar
Palamau.

Shri S.K. Dutta, 23-P/1A, Manicktola
Main Road, Calcutta-54.

4,000

12. Rajhara ...

Post Office Rajhara Ram Saran Das & Brothers, 18, Netaji
Colliery.
Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

6,67,000

East Bokaro Coalfield Hazaribagh
13. East Bokaro ...

Post Office Pichri

East Bokaro Collieries Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office Pichri.

15,000

14. New Selected
Dhori ...

Post Office Bermo

Gopal N. Singh, Krishna N. Singh,
Govind N. Singh, Shyam N. Singh,
Girdher N. Singh.

4,80,000

Nominated Owner:
Shri Bhuneshwar Goswami, Post Office
Bermo, Hazaribagh.
15. Pure Dhori ...

Post Office Tantri

Pure Dhori Colliery Company, Post
Office Tantri, Hazaribagh.

29,200

16. Selected Kargali Post Office Pichri
...

Vaydanji J-Dave, Post Office Box 8,
Jharia.

1,73,000

Hurrah Coalfield (Santhal Pargana)
17. Hurrah
Block 1A ...

Fulberia, Post
Office Mahagama.

Ideal Mining Combine, Post Office
Mahagama, District Santhal Pargana.

5,000

18. Hurrah
Block 1B ...

Post Office
Mahagama

Dwarka Prasad Marwari, Post Office
Mahagama, District Santhal Pargana.

4,000

19. Bergo ...

Post Office Denro
(Santhal Pargana).

Khudiram Seal, Post Office Dhanro
(Santhal Pargana).

4,000

20.

Churi Jilwari ... Post Office Godda

Fulchand Ram, Post Office Godda
(Santhal Pargana).

4,000

21.

Lalmatia ...

Post Office
Mahagama

Messrs. S. P. Coal Enterprises, Post
Office Mahagama, District Santhal
Pargana.

18,000

22.

Paharpur ...

Post Office
Mahagama

S. P. Coal Enterprises, Post Office
Mahagama (Santhal Pargana).

7,000

23.

Paul‟s Chilgo ... Post Office
Amrapara (Santhal
Pargana)

Paul Brothers, Post Office Jamtara
(Santhal Pargana).

4,000

21

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)
No.
1

2

24. Simlong ...

3

4

5

Post Office Dhamni

H.N. Bhagar, Post Office Barhait (Santhal
Pargana).

4,000

Jainty Coolfields (Santhal Pargana)
25. Bhawanipur ...

Post Office Chitra

Sidheswari Prasad, N. Deo, Post Office
Chitra.

13,000

26. Central
Saharpuri ...

Post Office Chitra

M.N. Singh and S.S. Singh, Post Office
Chitra (Santhal Pargana).

15,000

27. Chatkam ...

Post Office Dhamni
(Santhal Pargana).

H.N. Bhagat, Post Office Barhait (Santhal
Pargana).

4,000

28. Chitra Central ... Post Office Chitra

B.N. Mandal and Company, Post Office
Chitra (Santhal Pargana).

7,000

29. East Damagorah Post Office Kukraha
...

R.N. Singh, Post Office Saroth.

15,000

30. Gandharb ...

Shri Tibriwal, Post Office Deoghar.

4,000

31. Girija ...

Post Office Chitra

Shri M.K. Singh, Post Office Chitra (Santhal Pargana).

4,000

32. Haripur ...

Post Office
Mahagama

Purushottam Das, Post Office Mahagama
(Santhal Pargana).

4,000

33. Harinsingha
(Coal Pit). ...

Village & Post Office Biswanath Himathsingha, Village and
Dumka (Santhal
Post Office Dumka (Santhal Pargana).
Pargana)

4,000

34. Jayanti Central ...

Shri O.P. Santhalia, 16, India Exchange
Place, Calcutta-1.

54,000

35. Jayanti Khas ...

Shri Saligram Prasad Singh, Post Office
Madhupur.

4,000

36. Jilwari No. 7 ...

Shri Jagannath Prasad Bhagat, Post Office
Saraunri.

4,000

C.C. Mondal, Post Office Dishergarh,
Burdwan.

15,000

38. Mondal‟s
Post Office Chitra
Damgora West ... (Santhal Pargana)

A.K. Bhaduri, Post Office Chitra (Santhal
Pargana).

4,000

39. North Saharjuri ...

Shri A.P. Singh and others, Post Office
Kukraha.

7,000

Shri N.K. Singh, Post Office Chitra
(Santhal Pargana).

6,000

37. Mondal‟s
Damgora East
Sec. ...

40. Patrika ...

Post Office Chitra
(Santhal Pargana)

Post Office Chitra

22

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)
No.
1

2

3

4

41. Phulberia ...

Shri M.P. Marwari, Post Office
Mahajama.
M.G. Mishra, Post Office Kukraha.

5
5,000

42. Saharjuri ...

Post Office Kukraha

17,000

43. Tarabad
Boothari ...

Post Office
T.K. Gram

Shri Durga Jamjuri Coal Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office Barakar,
District Burdwan.

4,000

44. Tulsi Dabor ...

Post Office Chitra

Nalini Kumar Singh, Post Office Chitra
(Santhal Pargana).

19,000

Jharia Coalfield
45. Agarwal Godhur Post Office Kusunda
...

Agarwalla Godhur Coal Company, Post
Office Kusunda, Dhanbad.

95,000

46. Baramessia
Sikarichuck ...

Post Office Tundoo

Thakur Rama Avtar Singh, Post Office
Tundoo Dhanbad.

49,000

47. Baherabera
Chuck ...

Post Office Tundoo

Thakur Gupteswar Prasad Singh, Post
Office Tundoo, Dhanbad.

45,000

48. Barwabera ...

Post Office Nawagarh B. Trigunai and Brothers, Post Office
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

73,000

49. Barora ...

Post office Nawagarh Barora Coal Concern, Post Office
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

4,26,000

50. Bastacolla ...

Post Office Dhansar

23,32,000

Bastacolla Coal Company Limited, Post
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.

51. Basudeva „A‟
Post Office Khas
(Narayan seam) Jinagora.
...

A.B. Jugdutt and Company, Jharia.

9,000

52. Bera Colliery ... Post Office Jharia

Bera Colliery Company, Post Office
Jharia.

12,28,000

53. Bright Kusunda Post Office Dhansar
...

Bright Kusunda Colliery Company, Post
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.

4,000

54. Bright Tasra ...

Post Office Sindri

Seth Jharumal, Post Office Sindri,
Dhanbad.

18,000

55. Basudev „A‟ ...

Post Office Khas
Jeenagora

R.B. Jugdutt and Company, Jharia.

17,000

56. Banerjee‟s
Dobary ...

Post Office Jharia

S.B. Banerjee and Sons, Post Office
Jharia.

4,000

57. Central
Ganeshpur ...

Post Office Nawagarh Shyamlal Sunda and Company, Post
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

41,000

23

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
3

Amount (in
rupees)

4

5

58. Central Kendwadih Post Office
...
Nawagarh

Narsingh Harji, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

2,88,000

59. Central Kessurgarh Post Office
...
Nawagarh

Bhairobux Agarwalla, Post Office
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

80,000

60. Central Baihardih ... Post Office
Katrasgarh

K.K. Chandra & Brothers, Post Office
Katrasgarh.

76,000

61. Central Sinidih ...

Srimati Manjula Devi, Post Office
Tundoo.

4,000

62. Central Golukdih ... Post Office Jharia

Srimati Jyotsna Devi, “Nilachal”, Post
Office Sitarampur, Burdwan.

44,000

63. Central Dobary ...

Srimati Jayanti Devi, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

42,000

Moolji N. Cholia, Post Office
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

1,01,000

Post Office Tundoo

Post Office Jharia

64. Central Keshalpur Post Office
...
Katrasgarh
65. Central Godhur ...

Post Office Kusunda Central Godhur Colliery Company, Post
Office Kusunda, Dhanbad

42,000

66. Central Jayramdih Post Office
...
Nawagarh

Paul Brothers, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

49,000

67. Central Tasra ...

Post Office Sindri

Central Tasra Coal Company Limited
Post, Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

52,000

68. Central
Angarpathra ...

Post Office Sijua

Central Angarpathra Colliery Company,
Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.

99,000

69. Central Bansjora. ... Post Office Sijua

Khas Sijua Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,13,000

70. Chandore ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

R.N. Singh and others, Post Office
Katrasgarh.

67,00

71. Chandore

Post Office Sijua

D.P. Agarwalla, Jharia, Dhanbad.

16,000

72. Central Sulunga ... Post Office Khas
Jeenagora

Purushottampur Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

4,98,000

73. Central Chandore ...

Srimati Jyotsna Devi, Post Office Jharia
Dhanbad.

4,000

Sheikh Brothers and Company, Post
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

56,000

74. Damra Khas ...

Post Office
Nawagarh

24

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

75. Damra Pinalgoria ... Post Office
Nawagarh

Lala Mohinder Paul, Post Office
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

35,000

76. Diamond
Phularitand ...

Post Office
Kharkharee

Shyama Coal Company, Post Office
Kharkharee.

63,000

77. Dhansar ...

Post Office Dhansar Pure Dhansar Coal Company, Post
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.

3,18,000

78. Dhansar, NBH ...

Post Office Dhansar Dhansar Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.

2,84,000

79. East Benedih ...

Post Office
Nawagarh

East Bengal Coal Concern (Private)
Limited, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

1,09,000

80. East Dharmaband ... Post Office
Nawagarh

East Dharmaband Colliery Company,
Post Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

22,000

81. East Khas Baihardih Post Office Tundoo
...

East Khas Baihardih Coal Company,
Post Office Tundoo

1,00,000

82. East Mandra ...

Post Office
Nawagarh

Bharat Coal Company, Post Office
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

55,000

83. East Bastacolla ...

Post Office Dhansar East Bastacolla Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,32,000

84. East Busseriya ...

Post Office Kusunda East Busseriya Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, Shanti Bhawan,
Dhanbad.

10,08,000

85. East Sinidih ...

Post Office Tundoo

P. Chanchani and Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Tundoo.

60,000

86. East Kujama ...

Post Office Jharia

East Kujama Colliery Company, Post
Office, Sijua, Dhanbad.

43,000

87. East Keshalpur ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Shri Baijnath Chowdhury and others,
Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

40,000

88. East Kendwadih ... Post Office Dhansar East Kendwadih Coal Company Limited,
Kusunda.

43,000

89. East Lohabati ...

Post Office
Ramnagargarh

East Murulidih Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,48,000

90. East Tetulmari ...

Post Office Sijua

East Tetulmari Colliery Company
Limited, Sijua.

4,000

91. East Murulidih ...

Post Office Mohuda P.K. Lalla, Post Office Kharkharee,
District Dhanbad.

4,000

25

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
4

5

East Godhur Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office
Dhanbad.

4,000

93. Golden Jeenagora ... Post Office Khas
Jeenagora.
94. Ghutway ...
Post Office
Karmatand

Salunga Collieries (Private) Limited,
Post Office Dhanbad. .

7,64,000

Ghutway Colliery Company, Dugda,
District Hazaribagh.

4,000

95. Golden Sinidih ...

Post Office
Tundoo

Hit Narayan Singh, Post Office
Tundoo, Dhanbad.

9,000

96. Ideal Keshalpur ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Ideal Keshalpur Colliery Company,
Post Office Katrasgarh.

39,000

97. Jogidih ...

Post Office
Tundoo

P.K. Lalla and Brothers, Post Office
Tundoo, Dhanbad.

68,000

98. Joyramdih ...

Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Joyramdih Coal Company, Post
Office Nudkhurkee, Dhanbad.

99. Kendwadih
(Mondal) ...

Post Office
Nawagarh

B.N. Mondal and Company, Post
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

55,000

100. Khas Muraidih ...

Post Office Tundoo

U.N. Lala, Post Office Tundoo,
Dhanbad

4,000

101. Khas Sinidih ...

Post Office
Nawagarh.

Gyan Chand Sunda and Company,
Jharia.

75,000

102. Khodo Valley ...

Post Office
Nawagarh

Jiwanlal Sunda, Jora Phatak, Dhanbad.

60,000

103. Khas Bansjora ...

Post Office Bansjora

Khas Bansjora Colliery Company, Post
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad.

1,70,000

104. Khas Bahiardih
...

Post Office Tundoo

Khas Bahiardih Coal Company, Post
Office Tundoo

33,000

105. Katras New ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Shrimati Kashibai, Post Office
Katrasgarh

96,000

106. Kuya and Khas
Kuya ...

Post Office Jharia

Kuya Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,33,000

107. Khas Katrasgarh
...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Mustafi and Company, Post Office
Katrasbazar, Dhanbad.

20,000

108. Khas Godhur ...

Post Office Kusunda

Khas Godhur Coal Company, Post
Office Kusunda.

48,000

109. Khas Kusunda ...

Post Office Kusunda

Khas Kusunda Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 40, Strand Road, Calcutta- 1.

3,25,000

92. East Godhur ...

*

3

Amount (in
rupees)

Post Office
Kusunda

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 156 and 210.

26

*

2,42,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

110. Karmatand ...

3

Amount (in
rupees)

4

5

Sri Ram Coal Company, Post Office
Karmatand.

1,63,000

111. Khas Joyramdih ... Post Office
Nawagarh

Khas Joyramdih Colliery Company, Post
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

*

112. Khas Matigora ... Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Khas Matigora Colliery Company, Post
Office Nudkhurkee, Dhanbad.

4,000

113. Kalisthan
Angarpathra ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Kalisthan Angarpathra Coal Company,
Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

43,000

114. Khas Sijua ...

Post Office Sijua

Khas Sijua Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

5,42,000

115. Khas Kandra ...

Post Office Sindri

Nasib Singh Constituted Attorney (Owner
-Sukla Chandra Prava Debi and Sons,
Post Office Sindri).

4,000

116. Khas Pandedih ... Post Office Sijua

The Khas Pandedih Colliery Company,
Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.

4,000

117. Keshalpur ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Seo Shankar Bole, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

4,000

118. Liberty ...

Post Office Jharia

Agarwal Mining Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,18,000

119. Laxmi Salanpur ... Post Office
Katrasgarh

L.B. Singh and Company, Post Office
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

4,000

120. Mandra South
Barora ...

Bijoy Narain Singh and Jagdeo Prasad
Singh, Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

35,000

121. Model Muraidih... Post Office
...
Nawagarh

R.K. Pandey, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

6,000

122. Manaitand ...

Post Office
Dhanbad

Manaitand Colliery Company, Post Office
Dhansar, Dhanbad.

1,11,000

123. Majhlitand ...

Post Office Tundoo Sri Pritish Lalla, Post Office Tundoo.

Post Office
Karmatand

Post Office
Katrasgarh

1,12,000

51,000

124. Model Joyramdih Post Office
...
Nawagarh

Paul Brothers, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

4,000

125. Model
Angarpathra ...

B.L. Agarwalla, Post Office Govindpur,
Dhanbad.

1,10,000

126. Modern Sudamdih Post Office
...
Pathardih

Modern Sudamdih Colliery Company,
Post Office Pathardih, Dhanbad.

4,000

127. New Kendwadih Post Office
...
Nawagarh

K.P. Lall & Sons, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

49,000

*

Post Office Sijua

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 148.

27

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

128. New Muraidih ... Post Office
Kharkharee

Messrs Kamalendu & Subhendu
Banerjee, 420, Shyampukur Street
Calcutta.

4,000

129. North & Khas
Post Office
Muraidih ...
Nawagarh
130. North Baramossia Post Office
...
Tundoo
131. North Tundoo
Post Office
Khas ...
Katrasgarh
132. North Bhuggatdih Post Office
...
Dhansar

Kaluram Heliwal, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

4,000

North Baramossia Coal Company, Post
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.
R.L. Aggarwala, Post Office Katrasgarh

60,000

Srimati Narmada Bala Gupta, Sri Dina
Nath Agarwal and Bansdo Prasad
Agarwala, Post Office Jharia Dhanbad.

1,29,000

133. Nichitpur ...

Post Office
Bansjora

Nichitpur Coal Company (Pvt.) Limited,
7 Manoharpukar Road, Calcutta-26.

3,03,000

134. North Sinidih ...

Post Office
Tundoo

Sankarlall Kejarilall, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

1,65,000

135. New Golakdih ... Post Office
Govindpur

Biswanath Agarwalla, Post Office
Govindpur, Dhanbad.

14,000

136. North Golukdih ... Post Office
Baliapur

Kishanlall Ranjelall, Post Office
Baliapur, Dhanbad.

1,41,000

137. Narayanpur ...

Srimati Naraini Devi, Post Office
Katrasgarh.

1,38,000

138. North Akashkinari Post Office
...
Katrasgarh

Khimji Dossa and Company, Post Office
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

2,17,000

139. North
Dharmaband ...

Kunverji Kalyanji, Post Office
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

44,000

140. North Tentuliya ... Post Office
Katrasgarh

Debram Ramji, Post Office Katrasgarh

3,26,000

141. North Dobari ...

Post Office Jharia

Sahana Coal Company, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,44,000

142. North & West
Ghanuadih ...

Post Office Jharia

North & West Ghanuadih Colliery
Company, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

6,64,000

143. New Katras ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

New Katras Coal Company, Post Office
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

41,000

144. New Salanpur ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Madhu Lachman & Sons, Post Office
Katrasgarh.

6,000

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Post Office
Katrasgarh

145. North Keshalpur ...Post Office
Katrasgarh

North Keshalpur Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office Katrasgarh,
Dhanbad.
28

4,000

12,35,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

146. North Godhur ...

3

4

Post Office Kusunda North Godhur Colliery Company, Post
Office Kusunda, Dhanbad.

147. North Loyabad ... Post Office Bansjora North Loyabad Coal Company, Post
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad.

Amount (in
rupees)
5
4,000
3,89,000

148. North Kessurgarh Post Office
...
Nadkhurkee

Nandalall Shaha & others, Post Office
Nawagarh.

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 111.

149. Nudkhurkee ...

M.B. Roy and Brothers, Post Office
Nudkhurkee.

3,57,000

150. National Tasra ... Post Office Sindri

Kailashram Khanna, Post Office Sindri,
Dhanbad.

13,000

151. New Angarpathra Post Office
...
Katrasgarh

New Angarpathra Colliery Company,
Post Office Katrasgarh.

1,08,000

152. New Pandedih ... Post Office Sijua

New Pandedih Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia.

10,000

153. North & North
Post Office
East Angarpathra Katrasgarh

North Angarpathra Coal Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

72,000

154. North Tetulmari... Post Office Sijua

North Tetulmari Colliery Company, Post
Office Sijua, Dhanbad.

8,89,000

155. New Busserya

Post Office
Bansjora

New Busserya Coal Company, Post
Office Sijua, Dhanbad.

11,000

156. New Joyramdih

Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Ajit Kumar Chanda, Post Office
Nudkhurkee.

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 98.

Post Office
Nudkhurkee

157. North Gondudih. Post Office
...
Kusunda

North Gondudih Colliery Company, Post
Office Kusunda.

4,000

158. New Aukland
Colliery ...

Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Sri Sankar Sen, Post Office Nudkhurkee,
Dhanbad.

4,000

159. New Dobary ...

Post Office Jharia

New Dobary Coal Company, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,000

New Phularitand Colliery Company, Post
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

4,000

160. New Phularitand. Post Office
...
Nawagarh
161. New Kunji ...

Post Office Mohuda Mrs. B. Kaul, Tower House, Dhanbad.

29

4,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

162. New Tasra ...

Post Office Sindri

163. Pure Barora ...

Post Office Nawagarh N. Sahai, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

1,60,000

164. Pure Benedin ...

Post Office Nawagarh Doaba Coal Company (Private) Limited,
Sunda House, Joraphatak Road, Dhanbad.

11,000

New Tasra Coal Company, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,000

165. Pure Dharmaband Post Office Katrasgarh B.N. Jagdeo Prasad Singh, Post Office
...
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

17,000

166. Pure Ganeshpur ... Post Office Nawagarh Pure Ganeshpur Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,14,000

167. Pure Nichitpur ... Post Office Bansjora

Pure Nichitpur Colliery Company, Post
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad.

58,000

168. Pure Sinidih ...

Thakur Ram Avtar Singh, Post Office
Tundoo, Dhanbad.

4,000

169. Pure Suderaidih ... Post Office Tundoo

Thakur G.P. Singh, Post Office Tundoo,
Dhanbad.

30,000

170. Pure Selected
Golakdih ...

Pure Selected Golakdih Colliery
Company, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

93,000

171. Pure Bhuggatdih Post Office Jharia
...

Pure Bhuggatdih Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

1,05,000

172. Pure Salanpur ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

G.V. Modi (Receiver), Post Office Jharia.

44,000

173. Pinalgoria ...

Post Office
Nawagarh

East Kessurgarh Colliery Company, Post
Office Nawagarh.

26,000

174. Pure Damoda ...

Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Pandit Ram Bhaju Upadhya and
Company, Post Office Nudkhurkee.

2,10,000

175. Pure Joyramdih ... Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Pure Joyramdih Colliery Company, Post
Office Nudkhurkee, Dhanbad.

1,24,000

176. Pure Selected
Bansjora ...

Post Office Sijua

H.C. Bhutani, Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.

4,56,000

177. Pure Selected
Tetulmari ...

Post Office Sijua

Pure Selected Tetulmari Colliery
Company Limited, Post Office Sijua,
Dhanbad.

45,000

178. Pure Golakdih ... Post Office Jharia

Pure Golakdih Coal Company, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

80,000

179. Pathergoria ...

Bharat Mining Corporation, 9, Old Court
House Street, Calcutta.

4,000

Post Office Tundoo

Post Office Jharia

Post Office Mohuda

30

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

180. Pure Bansjora ...

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine

Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

Post Office Sijua

Madanlal Baswatia, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

4,000

181. Pure Chandore ...

The West Chandore Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,000

182. Ramgarh Jharia ... Post Office
Karmatand

Ramgarh Jharia Colliery Company, Post
Office Karmatand, Dhanbad.

1,64,000

183. Royal Tisra ...

Royal Tisra Colliery Company, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

50,000

Post Office Jharia

184. Real Sudamdih ... Post Office Pathardih Madhab Sinha, Post Office Pathardih.

4,000

185. Selected Mandra Post Office Nawagarh Selected Mandra Colliery Company, Post
...
Office Nawagarh.

18,000

186. Selected Muraidih Post Office Nawagarh Selected Muraidih Colliery Company, Jiwan
...
Sadan, Dhanbad.

22,000

187. South Barora ...

Post Office Nawagarh D.P. Lall & Sons, Post Office Nawagarh,
Dhanbad.

2,97,000

188. Selected
Govindpur ...

Post Office Katrasgarh Selected Govindpur Coal Concern, Post
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

42,000

189. Selected
Keshalpur ...

Post Office Katrasgarh Selected Keshalpur Colliery Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

4,000

190. Selected Godhur ...Post Office Kusunda

Selected Godhur Coal Company, Post
Office Kusunda Dhanbad.

91,000

191. Sri Godhur ...

Post Office Kusunda

Katasaria Coal Company (Private) Limited,
Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

35,000

192. South Loyabad ... Post Office Bansjora

South Loyabad Coal Company, Post Office
Bansjora, Dhanbad.

21,000

193. Selected
Sudhamdih ...

Selected Sudamdih Colliery Company, Post
Office Sindri Institute, Dhanbad.

41,000

Selected Jogta Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,000

195. South Muraidih ... Post Office Katrasgarh South Muraidih Colliery Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

6,00

196. Sudreadih ...

Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Sunda Shamlal, Post Office Nawagarh

4,000

197. Selected
Ghanuadih ...

Post Office Jharia

Selected Ghanuadih Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,000

198. Selected
Joyrampur ...

Post Office Jharia

Selected Joyrampur Colliery Company
Ananda Bhavan, Post Office Jharia.

4,000

Post Office Sindri
Institute

194. Selected Jogta ... Post Office Jharia

31

Sl. Name of the mine
No.

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine

Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

199. South Jamdiha ... Post Office
Nudkhurkee

Natwarlal Shamaldas and Company, Post
Office Nudkhurkee.

4,000

200. Sree Jagannath ... Post Office Tundoo

North Baramessia Colliery Company
Limited, Ashok Bagan, Post Office
Dhanbad.

4,000

201. Upper Mandra ... Post Office
Nawagarh

Upper Mandra Colliery Company, Post
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.

92,000

202. Upper Jeenagora ... Post Office
Jeenagorah

G.S. Atwal 243, Sector 9/C, Chandigarh.

4,000

203. Upper Jharia ...

Post Office Jharia

Upper Jharia Colliery Company, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

4,000

204. Victory ...

Post Office Dhansar

United Mining Company Limited, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

9,17,000

205. West Phularitand Post Office
...
Nawagarh

West Phularitand Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

55,000

206. West Jogidih ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

Bihar National Coal Company, Post Office
Katrasgarh.

39,000

207. West Katras ...

Post Office
Katrasgarh

N.K. Bose and Brothers, West Katras
Colliery, Post Office Katrasgarh.

1,22,000

208. West Koiludih ... Post Office
Katrasgarh

West Koiludih Colliery Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh.

1,08,000

209. West Ramkanali ... Post Office
Katrasgarh

West Ramkanali Colliery Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh, District Dhanbad.

13,82,000

210. West Joyramdih ... Post Office
Nudkhurkee

A.K. Chandra, Post Office Nudkhurkee,
Dhanbad.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against Sl.
No. 98

1

2

211. West Angarpathra Post Office Katrasgarh West Angarpathra Colliery Company
...
Limited, Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

1,30,000

212. West Chandore ... Post Office Sijua

West Chandore Colliery Company, Post
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.

85,000

213. West Mudidih ...

Post Office Sijua

Waliram Taneja Mines (Private) Limited,
Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.

14,39,000

214. West & Sowaria
Salanpur ...

Post Office Katrasgarh M.P. and D.D. Agarwalla, Dhanbad Bazar,
Dhanbad.

55,000

32

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

215. West Bhurangya. Post Office Mohuda P.K. Lalla, Post Office Kharkharee
...

4,000

216. West Gobindpur. Post Office
...
Katrasgarh

West Gobindpur Coal Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

4,000

217. West Keshalpur ... Post Office
Katrasgarh

West Keshalpur Colliery Company, Post
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.

4,000

218. West Maheshpur Post Office Tundoo
...

Sri Agarwalla Coal Company, Post
Office Tundoo, Dhanbad.

4,000

219. West Salanpur ... Post Office
Ganga Bishan Mohandra, Post Office
Katrasgarh
Jharia, Dhanbad.
Bihar - Raniganj (Mugma Coalfield)
220. Badjna ...
Post Office
Oriental Coal Company Limited, 25,
Nirshachati
Brabourne Road, Calcutta.

4,000

28,59,000

221. Basumata ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

D.N. Chandra and Brothers, Post Office
Nirshachati Dhanbad.

4,000

222. Bhogkat ...

Post Office Mugma

Banga Laxmi Coal Company, Post Office
Mugma, Dhanbad.

5,000

223. Chapapur ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

B.N. Dutta and others, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

25,000

224. Central Shampur Post Office
...
Nirshachati

A.K. Chandra and others, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

28,000

225. Central Laikdih ... Post Office Mugma

Central Laikdih Colliery Company, Post
Office Mugma, Dhanbad.

4,000

226. Chattabar ...

Messrs. New Chattabar Coal Company
Limited, Post Office Chirkunda, District
Dhanbad.

18,000

227. Dahibari ...

Post Office Mugma

Dahibari Coal Company, Post Office
Mugma.

7,50,100

228. East Badjna ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

S.N. Chanda and Brothers, Post Office
Nirshachati.

1,09,000

229. East Kapasara ... Post Office Mugma

Banga Laxmi Coal Company, Post Office
Mugma, Dhanbad.

37,000

230. East Kumardhubi Post Office
...
Chirkunda

Sri Laxmi Narain Trust, Post Office
Jharia, Dhanbad.

7,15,000

231. East Rajpura ...

Post Office Mugma

Rajpura Coal Company, Post Office
Mugma.

10,400

232. East Shampur ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

Oriental Coal Company, Post Office
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.

16,000

33

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

Amount (in
rupees)

4

5

233. Edgarcoor
(Durgamata) ...

Post Office
Chirkunda

Durgamata Coal Company, Post Office
Chirkunda.

5,200

234. Edgarcoor ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

Srimati Sankarben Patel, Post Office
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.

14,400

235. East Palasia ...

Post Office Mugma

Shri K.K. Goswami Post Office Mugma,
Dhanbad.

32,300

236. Edgarcoor
(Agarwalla) ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

B.R. Agarwalla and Company, Post
Office Kumardhubi Dhanbad.

31,000

237. Jamdohi
Basantimata ...

Post Office Mugma

Jamdohi Coal Company, Post Office
Mugma, Dhanbad.

4,43,800

238. Jamburya
(Selected
Jamburya) ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4
Clive Row, Calcutta.

1,24,000

239. Kalimata ...

Post Office Mugma

G.L. Dubey, Post Office Mugma,
Dhanbad.

1,24,300

240. Kapasara ...

Post Office Mugma

Bihar Coal Syndicate (Private) Limited,
Post Office Mugma, Dhanbad.

65,300

241. Khas Kalimati ... Post Office
Kumardhubi

Khas Kalimati Coal Company, Post
Office Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.

1,00,000

242. Khas Nirsha ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Mohatta Brothers, 19, British Indian
Street Calcutta-1.

2,73,000

243. Khoodia ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Khoodia Coal Company, Post Office
Nirshachati, Receiver Onkarmal
Agarwalla, Post Office Barakar,
Burdwan.

2,18,000

244. Khas Badjna ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Western Bengal Coalfields Limited,
Administrtive Office, Post Office Moria
Colliery, Burdwan.

11,12,000

245. Khas
Brindabanpur ...

Post Office Mugma

Bal Krishna Coal Company, Post Office
Barakar.

7,000

246. Khas Edgarcoor ... Post Office
Kumardhubi

B.N. Mondal and L.L. Agarwalla, Post
Office Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.

4,000

247. Kooardih ...

Banerjee and Company, Post Office
Barakar.

1,29,000

248. Lower Badjna ... Post Office
Nirshachati

Associated Laikdih Colliery Limited,
18,Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.

7,52,000

249. Lower Begunia ... Post Office Mugma

Associated Laikdih Colliery Limited, 18,
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.

4,000

Post Office Barakar

34

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

Amount (in
rupees)

2

3

250. Merah ...

Post Office
Chirkunda

Raghunath Agarwalla, Post Office
Chirkunda.

1,28,000

251. Nayadanga ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

K.G. Saiji & Sons, Post Office Searsole
Rajbari, Burdwan.

1,02,000

252. Nirsha Khas ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Nirsha Khas Colliery (Private) Limited,
Post Office Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.

1,37,800

253. North Badjna ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

North Badjna Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Ranaghat, Nadia.

*

254. North Laikdih ... Post Office
Nirshachati

North Laikdih Coal Company, 22, Strand
Road Calcutta.

2,17,000

255. Oriental ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

Oriental Coal Company, Post Office
Kumardhubi.

41,000

256. Pure Laikdih ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Pure Laikdi Colliery (Private) Limited,
26A, Fern Road, Calcutta-19.

2,18,400

257. Pure Mandman ... Post Office Mugma

East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4,
Clive Row, Calcutta.

1,46,000

258. Pure Rajpura ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

Shrimati Sankarben Patel, Post Office
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.

79,000

259. Pure Shampur ... Post Office
Nirshachati

D. Mondal & Company, Post Office
Nirshachati.

3,04,000

260. Palasia ...

Post Office Mugma

K.K. Goswami, Post Office Mugma.

73,000

261. Pure Hariajan ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4,
Clive Row, Calcutta.

78,000

262. Pure Singhpur ... Post Office
Nirshachati

Satya Pal Kapoor, Kapoor Niwas,
Dhanbad.

1,68,000

263. Rajpura ...

Post Office
Mugma

R.K. Coal Company, Barakar (West
Bengal).

37,000

264. Reliance ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

Reliance Coal Company, Post Office
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad

1,30,000

265. Ramkrishna ...

Post Office
Chirkunda

P.N. Mukherjee, Post Office Chirkunda.

83,600

266. Raj ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

D.N. Sen, Post Office Mugma, Dhanbad.

10,000

267. Satyanarayan ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

Rurmal Agarwal, Post Office
Stayanarayan Colliery, Kumardhubi

55,700

*

4

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 277.

35

5

8,27,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

4

Amount (in
rupees)

2

3

268. Shampur ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Khas Shampur Coal Company, Post
Office Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

2,51,000

269. Shampur ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

The Kamala Coal Company, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

17,400

270. South Marma ...

Post Office
Mugma

Guljarilal Agarwalla, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

29,800

271. Shri Durgamata ... Post Office
Mugma.

J.N. Garai & others, Post Office
Chirkunda.

81,700

272. Shri Gopinathpur ... Post Office
Nirshachati

Srimati Mahamaya Devi, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

3,23,400

273. Shri Lakhmimata. Post Office
...
Chirkunda

J.K. Garai & Company, Post Office
Mugma, Dhanbad.

1,55,000

274. Sudarshan
Shampur ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

K.L. Bhambri & Company, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

1,07,800

275. Shri Raghunathji ... Post Office
Chirkunda

Shri Raghunathji Coal Company, Post
Office Chirkunda.

1,13,000

276. Selected Fatka ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

Shri Krishna Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Kumardhubi,
Dhanbad.

1,13,000

277. South Badjna ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

South Badjna Coal Company, Post
Office Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

278. Shampur ...

Post Office
Mugma

The Durga Coal Company, Post Office
Mugma.

39,000

279. Selected Bhaljori ... Post Office
Dhanbad

Selected Bhaljori Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

4,000

280. Selected Laikdih ... Post Office
Govindpur

Satya Narayan Agarwala & Partners,
Post Office Nirshachati Dhanbad.

8,000

281. South East Badjna Post Office
...
Nirshachati

J.K. Banerjee & others, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.

4,000

282. Tewari‟s Beldanga Post Office
Khas ...
Churulia

M/s. S.C. Tewari & others Post Office
Parsundi, District Birbhum.

4,000

283. Upper Mehtadih ... Post Office
Nirshachati

East Indian Coal Company, 4 Clive
Row, Calcutta-1.

1,69,000

36

5

Amount
included in the
amount specified
against SL. No.
253.

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5
4,000

284. West Barakar ...

Post Office
Kumardhubi

285. West Barakar ...

Post Office Mugma Bihar Fire Bricks and Potteries Limited,
22 Strand Road, Calcutta- 1.

15,000

286. West Chanch ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

8,000

287. West Laikdih ...

Post Office Mugma West Laikdih Col Company, 152, B.K.
Pal Avenue, Calcutta-5.

64,200

288. West Rajpura

Post Office Mugma Kalyaneshwari Coal Company, Post
Office Mugma, Dhanbad.

8,000

289. West Shampur ...

Post Office
Nirshachati

4,000

290. Ara ...

Dinendra nath Das, Post Office
Kumardhubi.

West Chanch Coal Company, Post
Office Barakar.

Beharilal Agarwalla, Post Office
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.
Karanpura Coalfields
Post Office Kuju
North Ramgarh Colliary Company
(Private) Limited, 8, Deodar Street,
Calcutta-19.

6,87,000

291. Banwar ...

Post Office Mandu

Raghunath Bhagat, Hazaribagh

4000

292. Churi ...

Post Office Ray

United Karanpura Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, 91, Stephen House, „
Calcutta.

4,40,000

293. Central Saunda ... Post Office Saunda

United Collieries Limited, 5, Royal Exchange Place, Calcutta-1.

28,00,000

294. Dakra Buk Buka ... Post Office Khalari

United Karanpura Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, 91, Stephen House,
Calcutta.

25,84,000

295. Damodar Valley ... Post Office Hendegir B.K. Bhaduri & Sons, 10, Purulia Road,
Ranchi

1,31,000

296. Datma ...

Post Office Kuju

4,000

297. Gidhania ...

Post Office Ramgarh (1) Dhori Coal Company Limited,
(2) M/s. Anderson Wright Limited,
34/4, Gros Venor House, Old Court
House, Calcutta.

4,000

298. Hindegir ...

Post Office Hindegir Hindegir Mining Corporation Limited,
Hirapur, Dhanbad.

5,45,000

299. Hessagora ...

Post Office Kuju

88,000

300. Jharkhand ...

Post Office Ghatutand(under dispute)

M.K. Rana (Receiver), Bansilal Chowk,
Hazaribagh

Hessagora Coal Company, Post Office
Kuju.

37

11,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount
(in rupees)
5

301. Karanpura
Dewarkhand ...

Post Office Khalari Karanpura Dowarkhand Colliery
Company Limited, F-3, Gillanders
House, Calcutta

10,83,000

302. Karkata ...

Post Office Khalari Ajit Prasad Singhdeo & Others, 82,
Stephen House, Calcutta-1

5,16,000

303. Karanpura ...

Post Office Patratu Associated Karanpura Colliery (Private)
Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta- 1

12,14,000

304. Khas Karanpura ... Post Office Patratu Khas Karanpura Collieries Limited, 71,
Ganesh Chandra Avenue, Calcutta

8,30,000

305. Kedla ...

Post Office
Ghatutand

(under dispute)

34,000

306. Kuju ...

Post Office Kuju

Kuju Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Kuju

1,82,000

307. Lapanga ...

Post Office
Bhadaminagar

Hindustan Coal Company,
Bhadaminagar, Hazaribagh

2,36,000

308. Laiyo ...

Post Office Daneya North Bokaro Coal Company, Post
Office Daneya, Hazaribagh

1,89,500

309. Manki ...

Post Office Ray

National Cement Mines & Industries,
82, Stephen House, East, Calcutta-1.

2,58,000

310. Mael ...

Post Office
Chitarpur

Rajballav Singh, Chitarpur, Hazaribagh.

73,000

311. Model Dhori ...

Post Office
Chainpur

Model Dhori Colliery Company, Hazaribagh.

39,000

312. Mourpa ...

Post Office Kuju

A.K. Roy & R.P. Choudhary, Post
Office Kuju.

2,29,500

313. Mangardh ...

Post Office Mandu Mani Chatterjee, Hazaribagh.

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 327

314. New Sirkar
Colliery ...

Post Office Mandu (Ownership under dispute)

4,000

315. Pindra ...

Post Office Kuju

Pindra Coal Company, Ram Narayan
Jai‟s Compound, Ranchi.

93,000

316. Pakribarwadih ... Post Office
Barkagaon

Sayed Bokir Mehdi, Ranchi.

4,000

317. Ray ...

N.C.M.I. Limited, 82, Stephen House,
Calcutta.

5,63,000

Post Office Ray

38

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

318. Rauta ...

Post Office
Ramgarh
Cantonment
319. Religara ...
Post Office
Religara
320. South Karanpura Post Office
...
Hindegir
321. Sugia ...
Post Office
Chitarpur
322. Saunda „D‟
Post Office
(Birds) ...
Bhurkunda

323. Sirka ...

324. Sarubera ...

Amount
(in rupees)
5

(Ownership under dispute)

The Karanpura Colliery Limited,
Chartered Bank Building, Calcutta-1.
Chauhan Brothers, Old Commissioner‟s
Compound, Ranchi.
Sugia Coal Company, Chitarpur.

4,000

*

77,70,000
1,25,000
4,500

Karanpura Collieries Limited, Chartered Amount included
Bank Building, Calcutta-1.
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 319.
Post Office Argada South Karanpura Coal Company
28,83,000
Limited, Chartered Bank Building,
Calcutta- 1
Post Office Kuju
2,42,000
North Ramgarh Coal Company Limited,
8, Deodar Street, Calcutta-19

325. Semra ...

Post Office Mandu B.M. Roy, Burrabazar, Hazaribagh

9,000

326. Toera ...

Post Office Kuju

M.N. Chatterjee, Post Office Kuju

1,12,000

327. Topa ...

Post Office Kuju

Topa Coal Company, Kuju, Receiver;
M.H. Chatterjee and S.K. Banerjee, Post
Office Kuju, Hazaribagh.

328. West Tumang ...

Post Office M.C.
Chuskieganj,
Ranchi

Chauhan Brothers, Old Commissioner‟s
Compound, Ranchi.

†

1,23,000

2,89,500

Giridih
329. Kabribad ...

Post Office
Beniadih

Serampore Coal Company, Post Office,
Giridih.

23,000

MADHYA PRADESH
Central India Coalfields
330. Chirimiri ...

Post Office
Chirimiri

Chirimiri Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, 18/22, Sheik Memon Street,
Bombay-2.

37,51,000

331. New Chirimiri
(Ponri Hill) ...

Post Office
Chirimiri

Dababhoy‟s New Chirimiri Ponri Hill
Company (Private) Limited, Post Box
No. 85, Nagpur.

63,60,000

United Collieries Limited, 25,
Brabourne Road, Calcutta.

15,01,000

332. North Chirimiri ... Post Office
Gelhapani

*
†

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 322.
This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 313.

39

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in rupees)
No.
1

2

333. North
Jhagrakhand ...

3

4

5
*

61,42,000

Post Office
Jhagrakhand Colliery (Private) Limited,
Jhagrakhand Colliery 13, Gariahat Road, Calcutta-19.

334. Pure Chirimiri ... Post Office Chirimiri K.N. Dhady, Post Office Chirimiri.

1,80,000

335. Rajnagar ...

Post Office Rajnagar M/s. Dalchand Bahadur Singh, 15,
Colliery
Gariahat Road, Calcutta-19.

14,71,000

336. Ramnagar ...

Post Office
Ramnagar Colliery

Vindhya Colliery (Private) Limited, 18,
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

12,02,000

337. South
Jhagrakhand ...

Post Office
Jhagrakhand
Colliery.

Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private)
Limited, 15, Gariahat Road,
Calcutta-19.

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 333.

338. West Chirimiri ... Post Office Chirimiri Indra Singh & Sons (Private) Limited,
33,75,000
7, Wellesly Place, Calcutta-1
339. West
Post Office West
Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private)
Amount included
Jhagrakhand ... Jhagrakhand.
Limited, 13, Gariahat Road,
in the amount
Calcutta-19.
specified against
Sl. No. 333.
Pench-Kanhan Valley Coalfields
340. Ambara ...

Post Office
Junnerdeo

N.H. Ojha & Company Limited, F-3,
Gillander House, 8, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta.

341. Barkuhi ...

Post Office Parasea

Pench Valley Coal Company Limited,
„Hong Kong House‟, 31, Dalhousie
Square, Calcutta-1.

342. Barkuhi West ... Post Office Parasea

M/s. J. A. Trivedi Brothers, Post Box
No. 1, Balaghat, District Chhindwara.

343. Bhamori ...

Post Office Parasea

Amalgamated Coalfields Limited,
„Hong Kong House‟, 31, Dalhousie
Square, Calcutta-1.

344. Chandamata ...

Post Office Parasea

Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, Amount includeed
Post Office Parasea, Chhindwara.
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 341.

345. Datla East ...

5,41,000

†

53,08,000

2,16,000
‡

94,04,000

M/s. Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, Amount included
Post Office Parasea, District
in the amount
Chhindwara
specified against
Sl. No. 343.

*

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 337 and 339.
This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 344, 349 and 357.
‡
This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 345, 346, 350 and 360.
†

40

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

Amount (in
rupees)

4

5

346. Datla West ...

Post Officer
Junnerdeo

Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, „Hong Amount included
Kong House‟, 31, Dalhousie Square,
in the amount
Calcutta-1.
specified against
against Sl. No.
343.

347. Damua ...

Post Office
Damua Calliery

(Ownership under dispute)

348. Dhao ...

Post Office Dhao

Shri Durga Prasad, Dhao Colliery,
Junnerdeo, Chhindwara.
349. East
Post Office Parasea Pench Valley Coal Company Limited,
Dongarchickli ...
„Hong Kong House‟, 31, Dalhousie
Square, Calcutta-1.
350. Eklehra ...

Post Office Parasea Amalgamated Coalfields Limited „Hong
Kong House‟, 31, Dolhousic Square,
Calcutta-1.

351. East Barkuhi ...

Post Office Parasea J.A. Trivedi and Brothers, Balaghat,
Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh.
352. GhorawariPost Office
J.A. Trivedi and Brothers, Balaghat,
Hirdagarh ...
Ghorawari-Khurd Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh.
353. Ghorawari Kalan Post Office
T.K. Sukla, Post Office Ghorasora,
...
Ghorawari
Chhindwara.

6,76,000
21,500

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 341.
Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 343.
4,000
3,47,000
4,000

354. Jamkunda ...

Post Office
Junnerdeo

355. Kalichhapar ...

Post Office Damua (Ownership under dispute)
Collieries.

356. Newton Chickli

Post Office Parasea Newton Chickli Collieries (Private)
Limited, Post Office Parasea, Chhindwara.

357. North
Chandameta ...

Post Office Parasea Pench Valley Coal Company Limited,
„Hong Kong House‟, 31, Dalhousie
Square, Calcutta-1.

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 341.

358. Nandora ...

Post Office Parasea Pench Valley Coal Company Limited,
Parasea.

41,000

359. Rakhikol ...

Post Office RakhikolS.C. Kambata (Private) Limited, Maharshi
Karve Road, Bombay-20.

2,51,000

*

N.H. Ojha & Company Limited, F/3,
Gillander House, 8, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta-1.

*

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 355.

41

4,000

Amount included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 347.
52,01,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

360. Rawanwara ...

3

Amount (in
rupees)

4

Post Office Parasea Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, Post
Office Parasea, Chhindwara.

5
Amount included in
the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 343.

361. Rawanwara Khas Post Office Parasea Oriental Coal Company Limited 25, Bra...
bourne Road, Calcutta.

9,14,000

362. Sial Ghogri ...

Post Office
Junnerdeo

2,94,000

363. Sukri ...

Post Office Parasea The Jamai Majri Coal Company Limited,
Post Office Parasea, Chhindwara.

Sial Ghogri Group, Nelson Square,
Nagpur.

364. South Panara ... Post Office
Junnerdeo
365. Baroud ...
366. Domnara ...

Post Office
Ghorghoda
Post Office
Kharsia-Raigarh.

367. Dumnara ...

6,92,000
4,000

Lala Bikimla Jagannath, Post Office
Junnerdeo, Chhindwara.
Raigarh Coalfield
P.R. Gupta & others, Raigarh, Madhya
Pradesh.
R.N. Poddar, North Ambajhari Road,
Nagpur.
Sri J.K. Poddar, 32, Wardha Road,
Nagpur.

11,000
*

12,000

Amount included in
the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 366.

Sohagpur and Johilla Coalfields
†

368. Amlai ...

Post Office
Dhanpuri

Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall
Street, Calcutta-1.

369. Bhadra ...

Post Office Kotma

Rewa Mining Company Limited, Post
Office Kotma.

6,27,000

370. Birsingpur ...

Post Office
Birsingpur Pali

Johilla Coalfields Limited, Post Office
Birsingpur Pali, District Sahdol.

22,13,000

371. Burhar No. 1
and 2 ...

Post Office
Dhanpuri

Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall
Street, Calcutta-1.

Amount included in
the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 368.

372. Burhar No. 3 ... Post Office Dhanpuri Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall
Street, Calcutta-1.

Amount included in
the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 368.

373. Kotma ...

*
†

Post Office Kotma
Colliery

Associated Cement Company Limited,
121, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay-20.

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 367.
This amunt includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 371, 372 and 376.

42

97,42,000

44,28,000

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

Amount (in
rupees)

4

5

374. Nowrazabad ...

Post Office
Nowrazabad

Associated Cement Company Limited,
121, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay-20.

32,41,000

375. Rungta ...

Post Office Rungta
Colliery.

Mahabir Prasad Rungta and Partners,
Post Office Rungta Colliery.

4,42,000

376. Umaria ...

Post Office Umaria Rewa Coalfields Limited, Post Office
Umaria, District Sahdol.

MAHARASHTRA
Kamptee Coalfield
M/s. Oriental Coal Company Limited,
25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta-1.

377. Inder ...
378. Kamptee ...

Amount included in
the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 368.

Post Office
Kamptee

M/s. Oriental Coal Company Limited,
25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta-1.

8,29,000
21,22,000

Wardha Valley Coalfield
*

379. Ballarpur ...

Post Office
Ballarpur

380. Chanda
Rawatwari ...

Post Office Chanda R.B. Seth and Sri Ram Durga Prasad
Tumsar, District Bhandara.

381. Ghugus ...

Post Office
Maneakpur

382. Hindustan
Lalpeth ...

Post Office Chanda Perfect Pottery Company Limited,
Hanumantlal, Jubbalpore.

17,80,000

383. New Majri ...

Post Office Shivaji
Nagpur, Chanda.

Sethia Mining & Manufacturing
Corporation, 4, Bakul Bagan Row,
Calcutta-25.

10,10,000

384. Rajur ...

Post Office Rajur

Rajkumar Mining Company.

75,000

385. Sasti ...

Post Office Ballarpur Ballarpur Collieries Company Limited, Amount included in
Temple Road, Post Box No. 11, Nagpur. the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 379.

*

Ballarpur Collieries Company, Biseswar
House, Lajpat Rai Marg, Post Box No.
11, Nagpur.

38,77,000

8,21,000

Ballarpur Collieries Company, Biseswar Amount included in
House, Post Box No. 11, Nagpur.
the amount
specified against Sl.
No. 379.

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 381 and 385.

43

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

386. Shri Mahakali ... Post Office Mahakali Shri Mahakali Coal Mines Limited, 23B,
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1. (Under
Liquidator)
MEGHALAYA
Khasi and Jaintia Coalfields
387. Barsora ...
Assam Bengal Cement Company
Limited, 7, Wellesly Place, Calcutta-1.

4,000

388. Cherapunji ...

Post Office
The Cherrachhatak Ropeway Company
Cherapunji, District Limited, 1 & 2, Old Court House
K and J. Hills.
Corner, Calcutta- 1.

4,000

389. Laitryngew ...

The Cherrachhatak Ropeway Company
Limited, 1 & 2, Old Court House
Corner, Calcutta- 1.

4,000

390. Laitryngew ...

The Laitryngew Cherra Coal
Association, Post Office Cherapunji,
District U. K. Hills.

4,000

4,000

391. Mawsynram ...

Post Office
Mawsynram U. K.
Hills

Messra, Sidroka Marbaniang, Post
Office Shillong.

4,000

392. Thangjinath ...

Post Office
Pynursla

Assam Trading & Mining Company
(Private) Limited, Shillong.

7,000

ORISSA
Ib Valley Coalfield
393. Hingir Rampur ... Post Office Rampur Hingir Rampur Coal Company Limited,
Colliery
Post Box- 109, Home Street, Fort,
Bombay.

18,74,000

394. Ib River ...

Post Office
Brajrajnagar

Chandmal Indra Kumar Karnani, 3,
Synagogue Street, Calcutta-1.

1,50,000

395. Orient ...

Post Office
Brajrajnagar

Western Bengal Coal Company Limited,
Administrative Office, Moira Colliery,
District Burdwan.

34,90,000

WEST BENGAL
396. Ajoy Bank ...

Post Office
Nutandanga

Ajoy Coal Company (Private) Limited,
34A, Sardar Sankar Road, Calcutta-29.

47,000

397. Ardhagram Khas Post Office
...
Ardhagram

M/s. R.K. Agarwala & Sons (Private)
Limited, Lal Bazar, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

4,000

398. Adjoy Second ... Charanpur

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount included in
Row, Calcutta-1.
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 432.

44

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

399. Alkusa ...

3
Post Office Samdi

Amount (in
rupees)

4

5

J.D. Mondal, Post Office Samdi,
Burdwan.

16,000

400. Alkusa Gopalpur Post Office Samdi
...

Khanna Coat Corporation, Post Office
Samdi.

1,31,000

401. Aldih ...

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta-16.

Amount
included in the
amount
specified
against Sl. No.
411.

402. Akhalpur ...

Post Office
Charanpur

West Jamuria Coal Company Limited, 2,
Brabourne Road, Calcutta-1.

4,000

403. Aurang ...

Post Office Kasta

Kasta Coalfields Limited, 3, Synagogue
Street, Calcutta- 1.

4,000

404. Barmondia 3 & 4 Post Office
Pits ...
Kanayapur

New Beerbhum Coal Company Limited,
8, Clive Row, Calcutta-1.

8,90,000

405. Bhamuria ...

Post Office
Bhamuria

Naturia Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Bhamuria, District
Purulia.

1,31,000

406. Burradheme ...

Post Office
Sitarampur

North Dheme Coal Company Limited,
135, Canning Street, Calcutta-1.

1,12,000

407. Babisole ...

Post Office Ondal

Bharat Mining Corporation Limited, 91,
Stephen House, 5th Floor, Dalhousie
Square, Calcutta.

85,100

408. Belbaid ...

Post Office Toposi

Belbaid Collieries Limited, Post Office
Raniganj, Burdwan.

2,06,000

409. Bankola ...

Post Office Ukhra

Burrakar Coal Company Limited,
Chartered Bank Building, Calcutta- 1.

36,78,000

410. Banksimula 7 & 8 Post Office
Pits ...
Charanpur

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8 Clive Amount included in
Row, Calcutta- 1.
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 432.

411. Bhanora ...

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2,
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta- 16.

Post Office
Charanpur

*

1,41,30,000

412. Bhanora South ... Post Office
Charanpur

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, Amount included in
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta-16.
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 411.

413. Bright‟s Rana ...

D. Bright & Company (Private) Limited,
Post Office Charanpur, Burdwan.

Post Office
Charanpur

*

2,30,000

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 401, 412, 419, 452, 471, 510, 517,
518, 527, 563 and 629.

45

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1
2
414. Benodi Katta ...

3
Post Office Samdi

415. Bhagran ...

Post Office
Salanpur

416. Bon-Jemihari ... Post Office
Salanpur

4
Jiwanlal Collieries (Private) Limited,
Post Office Samdi.
The South Bhagran Coal Company, Post
Office Salanpur, Burdwan.

Amount (in
rupees)
5
19,000
1,01,000

Bon-Jemihari, Anthracite Coal
Company, Post Office Salanpur,
Burdwan.

2,65,000

417. Benali ...

Post Office
Raniganj

Nimcha Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 21, Jatindra Mohan Avenue,
Calcutta-6.

45,000

418. Bhadulia ...

Post Office
Khoriasole

Dubrajpur Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Bhadulia, Birbhum.

15,000

419. Bejdi ...

Post Office
Sitarampur

Equitable Coal Company, 1/2, Lord
Sinha Road, Calcutta-16.

Amount included in
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 411.

420. Bhutdoba ...

Post Office
Asansol

A.P. Dutta & Company, Hutton Road,
Asansol.

4,000

421. Borachak ...

Post Office
Asansol

Borachak Collieries Company, Post
Office Sitarampur.

4,000

422. Bhatmura ...

P.K. Agarwalla & Other, Post Office
Jharia Dhanbad.

4,000

423. Bharatchak ...

B.N. Sanyal (Private) Limited, District
Burdwan.

4,000

Samla Kajora Coal Company, Post
Office Hazaribagh, Birbhum.

4,000

425. Banksimula Old
Pits ...

Bengal Coal Company, 8, Clive Row,
Calcutta.

Amount included in
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 432.

426. Bansrachak ...

New Birbhum Coal Company Limited,
Burdwan

Amount included in
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 611.

424. Borejore ...

Post Office
Hazaribagh

427. Bamanbandh ...

Post Office
Charanpur

Gopal Narayan Singh, Nageswar Bag,
Post Office Buniadganj, Gaya

4,000

428. Bon-biddi ...

Post Office,
Salanpur

Shri Durgadas Maji, Village-Khurdike,
Post Office Salanpur, District Burdwan.

34,000

429. Bastabpur ...

Post Office
Khayeresel

Sakti Pada Nayak and others, Post Office
Bhadulia, Burdwan.

4,000

430. Banksimula 11 & Post Office
12 Pits. ...
Charaupur

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount included in
Row, Calcutta.
the amount specified
against Sl. No. 432.

46

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

4

5

Post Office
Sitarampur

M/s. Belrui Dishergarh Coiliery
(Private) Limited, Post Office Salanpur,
Burdwan.

4,000

432. Chinakuri Nos. 1 Post Office
& 2 Pits. ...
Sunderchak

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta.

*

433. Chinakuri No. 3 Post Office
Pit. ...
Sunderchak

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta.

Amount
included
in the amount
specified against
Sl. No. 432.

434. Chowkidanga ... Post Office Toposi

Birbhum Mining (Private) Limited, 7,
Monoharpukur Road, Calcutta.

16,000

435. Central & Lower Post Office Bahula
Jambad. ...

East Bahula Collieries Limited, 18,
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

5,34,000

436. Chora Pits
Post Office Bahula,
1.Chora-10 Pit Bardwan.
2. Chora-7 and 9
Pits. ...

Chora Coal Company, 8, Synagogue
Street, Calcutta- 1.

11,77,000

437. Central Satgram Post Office
...
Jaykaynagar

Harsookdas Balkissendas, 22, Burtolla
Street, Calcutta.

9,46,000

438. Chalbalpur ...

Post Office
Jaykaynagar

K.L. Selected Coal Concern, Post Office
Jaykaynagar.

93,000

439. Chapui Khas ...

Post Office
Kalipahari

Sahu Minerals & Properties Ltd., A-3,
Prithviraj Road, Jaipur.

16,28,000

B.D. Gorach, Nuruddin Road, Post
Office Asansol, Burdwan.

9,000

431. Belrui
Dishergarh ...

3

Amount (in
rupees)

440. Central Jamuria ...Post Office Nandi

3,75,06,000

441. Chaptoria ...

Post Office Salanpur East Chaptoria Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 22, Canning Street, Calcutta- 1.

99,000

442. Chinchuria ...

Post Office Asansol Ajoy Bank Minerals, Post Office
Churulia, Burdwan.

4,000

443. Chak Keshabganj
...

Shrimati Indumati Devi C/o. Kartick Ch.
Mukherjee, Village Jasidih, Post Office
Dishergarh, District Burdwan.

4,000

444. Chowrassia ...

Chowrassia Coal Company, Post Office
Kalipahari, Burdwan.

4,000

445. Chinchuria and
Chinchuria East.
...

Bahadur Singh Bhutoria & others, Post
Office Asansol, Burdwan.

4,000

*

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 398, 410, 425,430, 433, 494, 526,
604, 606, 635,642,643 and 644.

47

Sl. Name of the mine Location of the mine Name and address of owners of the mine
No.
1

2

3

4

Amount (in
rupees)
5

446. Central Nandi ... Post Office Nandi

Sri Nathumall Layelka Post Office
Raniganj, Burdwan.

4,000

447. Central Sitapur ...

Kanailal Mukherjee, Village Rajpur,
Nandi, Post Office Jamuria, Burdwan.

4,000

448. Central Kenda ... Post Office Toposi

Gopal Prasad Pandey, Central Kenda
Collieries, Post Office Toposi.

4,000

449. Chora Khas ...

Post Office Chora

Selected Chora Coal Company Limited,
6, Ezra Street, Calcutta-1.

4,000

450. Central
Dishergarh ...

Central Dishergarh

Central Dishergarh Coal Company
Limited, 174 Harrison Road, Calcutta.

4,000

451. Chakbaga Khas ... District Bankura

Sankar Prasad Singh Deo, Post Office
Panchaketeraz, Purulia.

4,000

452. Chowrashi ...

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2,
Lord Sinha Road Calcutta-16.

Post Office Neturia

Amount
included in the
amount specified
against Sl. No.
411.

453. Churulia East ... Post Office Churulia East Churulia Colliery Company, Post
Office Churulia, Burdwan.

4,000

454. Central Kajora ... Post Office
Kajoragram

Dutta‟s Kajora Coal Company Limited,
1, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.

15,000

455. Chinchuria Khas Post Office Asansol Khas Chinchuria Collieries Limited,
...
Post Office Asansol.
456. Charanpur ...
Post Office CharanpurIswar Shib Thakur Sabehat, Post Office
Nirsachatti.
457. Churulia ...
Post Office Churulia New Churulia Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 4, Lyons Range, Calcutta.
458. Central Baraboni Post Office Baraboni Sri A.K. Ghosh and Shri B.N.
...
Tarkatirtha, Post Office Baraboni,
Burdwan.
459. Central Poniati ... Post Office Nandi
Central Poniati Coal Company 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta.

4,000

460. Deoli (Mondal‟s) Post Office
...
Dishergarh

B.N. Mondal and Company, Post Office
Dishergarh, Burdwan.

1,56,000

461. Dhemomain ...

Post Office
Sitarampur

Dhemomain Collieries and Industries
Ltd., 36, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta16.

9,27,000

462. Darula ...

Post Office
Pandaveswar

East Satgram Coal Company Limited,
135, Canning Street, Calcutta.

5,41,000

463. Domoda ...

Post Office Raniganj Damodar Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Raniganj, Burdwan.

48

4,000
6,000
4,000

4,000

5,64,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine

Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

464. Damra ...

Post Office Kalipahari Katras Jherriah Coal Company, 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta.

17,41,000

465. Dabor ...

Post Office Samdi

H. Roy and T. Roy, Dabor Colliery
(Private) Limited, Post Office Samdi,
Burdwan.

85,000

466. Damagoria Amdiha Post Office Samdih
...

Damagoria Amdiha Coal Company, Post
Office Salanpur.

1,31,000

467. Deshermohan ...

Post Office Churulia

C.L. Poddar & others, Post Office
Churulia.

1,09,000

468. Dalmiya ...

Post Office Salanpur

R.S. Dalmiya, 26, New Alipore Road,
Calcutta-27.

1,07,000

469. Damra ...

Post Office Kalipahari A.P. Dutta & Company, Hutton Road,
Asansol.

4,000

470. Develia and W.
Develia ....

Post Office Kalipahari K.D.N. Singh, Chattapathar, Post Office
Kalipahari

4,000

471. Dhussal ...

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2,
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta-16.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against Sl.
No. 411.

472. Dhundabad ...

Post Office Samdi

J.B. Mondal & Company, Post Office
Samdi, Burdwan.

4,000

473. Dhadka ...

Post Office Asansol

Dhadka Colliery Company Limited, Post
Office, Asansol.

4,000

474. Diguli ...

Post Office Churulia

Oriental Mining & Trading Syndicate,
Post Office Churulia Burdwan.

4,000

475. East Jambad ...

Post Office
Kajoragram.

Amalgamated Jambad Syndicate (Private)
Limited 33, Biplabi Rash Behari Bose
Road, Calcutta-1.

1,93,000

476. East Kajora ...

Post Office Ondal

Swadeshi Mining & Manufacturing
Company Limited 33, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta-1.

56,000

477. East Sitalpur ...

Post Office Ukhra

East Barrakar Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Ukhra.

7,75,000

478. East Jamehari ...

Post Office Raniganj

Harsookdas Balkissendas, 22, Burtolla
Street, Calcutta-7.

2,09,000

479. East Nimcha ...

Post Office
Jaykaynagar

East Laikdih Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office, Jaykaynagar,
Burdwan.

69,56,000

49

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine

Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

480. East Satgram ...

Post Office
Jaykaynagar

East Satgram Coal Company (Private)
Limited 135, Canning Street, Calcutta-1.

4,000

481. East Baraboni ...

Post Office Charanpur East Baraboni Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 4, Mandevilla Gardens,
Calcutta-19.

4,000

482. East Jamuria ...

Post Office Toposi

East Jamuria Coat Company, Post Office
Toposi Burdwan.

93,000

483. East Ramnagar ...

Post Office Salanpur

D.R. Sabhlok (Through Constituted
Attorney B.L. Satnalika, Post Office
Salanpur, Burdwan)

44,000

484. East Lachipur ...

Post Office Sitarampur East Lachipur Collieries Balrui
Dishergarh Colliery Company, Post
Office Sitarampur, Burdwan.

4,000

485. East Dhundabad

Post Office Samdi

East Chundabad Colliery, Post Office
Sitarampur.

4,000

486. East Parsundi ...

Post Office Barhra
District Birbhum.

East Parsundi Collieries Limited, 2,
Commercial Building, 102, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta-1.

4,000

487. East Searsole ...

Post Office Raniganj

Shri Jayanta Kr. Banerjee & others,
Burdwan.

4,000

488. East Bonbiddi ...

Post Office Salanpur

Shri T.K. Mahato, Managing Agent,
Salanpur, Burdwan.

4,000

Ekrah Nandi Coal Company, F-2, Clive
Building, 8, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta-1.

4,000

489. Ekrah Nandi(New
Jamuri) ...

490. Goenka Kajora ...

Post Office
Kajoragram

Goenka Coal Company, S. B. Goenka,
Post Office Ukhra, Burdwan.

7,75,000

491. Guru Gopinath ...

Post Office Ukhra

Gnananda, Industries (Private) Limited,
Post Office Ukhra, Burdwan.

86,000

492. Ghusick ...

Post Office Kalipahari Coal & Mineral Syndicate, 36, Strand
Road, Calcutta- 1.

4,75,000

493. Ghusick ...

Post Office Kalipahari Ghusick & Muslia Collieries Limited,
Post Office, Kalipahari, Burdwan.

5,44,000

494. Girmint ...

Amount
Post Office Charanpur Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta-1.
included in the
amount
specified
against Sl. No.
432.

50

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine

Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

495. Gourangdih ...

Post Office Panuria

Gourangdih Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office, Panuria Burdwan.

1,33,000,

496. Gourangdih
Begunia ...

Post Office Jamgram

Jamgram Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Jamgram, Burdwan.

1,08,000

497. Gangaram Chak ...

Post Office Barhara

Mishra Mukherjee & Company, Post
Office Sagarbhanga, Birbhum,

26,000

498. Gopalpur ...

Post Office Mejia

Shri D.B. Parmar, Post Office Ardhagram
Bankura.

4,000

499. Hirakhun ...

Post Office Neturia

Shrimati Durgadevi Singhania, Post
Office Neturia, District Purulia.

7,000

500. Haripur ...

Post Office Bahula

Selected Baraboni Coal Company
(Private) Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta-1.

9,32,000

501. Hindustan Alkusa ... Post Office Samdi

Shri S.N. Agarwala, Post Office
Burrakar, Burdwan.

98,000

502. Hamirpur ...

Post Office Mejia
Bankura

New Hamirpur Colliery Company, Post
Office Toposi, Burdwan,

4,000

503. Itapara ...

Post Office Entapara,
District Burdwan

Shri Keshordeo, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

4,000

504. Jorekuri ...

Post Office Churulia

Jorekuri Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Box No. 55, Dhanbad.

26,000

505. Jambad Selected ... Post Office
Kajoragram

Shri Devji Gelabhai & others, Post
Office Kajoragram, Burdwan.

4,85,000

506. Jaipuria Kajora ...

Post Office Ondal

Swadeshi Mining & Manufacturing
Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta-1.

7,24,000

507. Jotejanki Khas ...

Post Office Toposi

Messrs. Banerjee Santan, Post Office
Toposi, Burdwan.

2,12,000

508. Jambad Kajora ...

Post Office Siduli

Jambad Kajora Colliery Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office Siduli,
Burdwan.

4,33,000

509. Jaykaynagar ...

Post Office
Jaykaynagar,

Aluminium Corporation of India
Limited, Post Office Jaykaynagar,
Burdwan.

10,88,000

51

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

Location of the mine

2

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

510. Jamuria A and B
Pits ...

Post Office Nandi

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1 /2, Amount
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta-16.
included in
the amount
specified
against Sl.
No. 411.

511. Jambad ...

Post Office
Kajoragram.

North Adjoy Coal Company, Post Office
Kajoragram, Burdwan.

15,000

512. Jamuna
Kanali New ...

Post Office Mejia,
District Bankura.

New Jamuna Kanali Colliery Company,
Post Office, Rajgaran, District Bankura.

4,000

513. Jamehari Selected. Post Office Raniganj
...

Coal Products (Private) Limited Post
Office Nutandanga District, Burdwan.

4,000

514. Jotedhemo ...

Post Office Ukhra

Jotedhemo Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, 23/B, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta-1.

15,000

515. Jamehari Khas
East ...

Post Office Searsol
Rajbari.

Jamehari Khas Colliery Private Limited,
Post Office Searsol, Rajbari.

4,000

516. Jambad ...

Post Office
Kajoragram.

S.S. Devi‟s Jambad Coal Concern
(Private) Limited, 10, Akhil Mistri Lane,
Calcutta.

4,000

517. Jamuria 5 and
6 Pits ...

Post Office
Charanpur.

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 2,
Fairlie Place, Calcutta.

Amount included in the
amount specified against
Sl. No. 411.

518. Jamuria 7 and
8 Pits ...

Post Office Charanpur. Equitable Coal Company Limited, 2,
Fairlie Place, Calcutta.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against Sl.
No. 411.

519. Kasta Bengal ...

Post Office Churulia

Kasta Coalfields Limited, 3, Synagogue
Street, Calcutta.

13,000

520. Kajora and
Post Office
Western Kajora ... Kajoragram.

Shri K.C. Palchowdhury, Post Office
Kajoragram, Burdwan.

2,07,000

521. Kajora (Guzdar) ... Post Office
Kajoragram.

The Guzdar Kajora Coal Mines Limited,
Post Office, Kajoragram.

2,24,000

522. Kajora Selected ... Post Office
Raniganj

Kajora Selected Colliery Company
Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta-1.

3,38,000

52

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

523. Khas Kajora ...

Post Office
Kajoragram.

Khas Kajora Coal Company Limited, 18, 21,09,000
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

524. Khas Searsole ...

Post Office Searsole
Rajbari.

Kumar K.N. Maliah, Post Office,
Searsole Rajbari.

7,000

525. Krishnagar ...

Post Office Toposi

Parasea Colliery Limited, 25, Netaji
Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

1,18,000

526. Kunustoria ...

Post Office Toposi

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount
Row, Calcutta-1.
included in
the amount
specified
against Sl.
No. 432.

527. Kottadih ...

Post Office Kottadih

Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1 /2, Amount
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta.
included in
the amount
specified
against Sl.
No. 411.

528. Kumardih ...

Post Office Ukhra

Kumardih Coal Company, Post Office
Ukhra, Burdwan.

11,19,000

529. Kumarkhala ...

Post Office Bahula

Kumarkhala Colliery Company, Post
Office Bahula, Burdwan.

*

Rani H. Devi and Rani K. Devi, Post
Office Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.

6,97,000

531. Kalipahari ...

Post Office Kalipahari. Ghusick and Muslia Colliery Limited,
Post Office Kalipahari, Burdwan.

4,03,000

532. Kuardih ...

Post Office Kalipahari. Kuaridh Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 41, Chowringhee Road,
Calcutta-16.

39,82,000

533. Khas Baraboni ...

Post Office Raghunath
Chak.

A. K. Collieries Company, 34-A, Sardar
Sankar Road, Calcutta-29.

19,000

534. Khas Mohanpur ... Post Office Samdi

Late Shri Ramgoti Hazra, Post Office
Kajoragram, Burdwan.

74,000

535. Khoirabad ...

Post Office Panuria

M/s. Jamgram Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Bara Kalibari,
District Bankura.

51,000

536. Kalikapur ...

Post Office Bara
Kalibari.

Shri Harihar Banerjee and Others, Post
Office Bara Kalibari, District Burdwan.

4,000

530. Khas Chadbalpur ... Post Office
Jaykaynagar.

*

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 598.

53

2,36,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

537. Kanyapur

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3
Post Office Naturia.

4

5

Neturia Coal Company Limited, Post
Office Neturia, District Purulia.

4,000

538. Khas Dhundabad ... Post Office Samdi.

Nagrath Collieries Limited, Post Office
Sarodi.

4,000

539. Khas Sitalpur ...

N.H. Ojha Company (Private) Limited,
Clive Building, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta-1.

4,000

540. Kajora (Roy Dutta) Post Office Kajoragram. Roy Dutta and Company, Post Office
...
Kajora, Burdwan.

4,000

Post Office Ukhra

541. Khandra Sitalpur ...

N.H. Ojha Company (Private) Limited,
Clive Building, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

4,000

542. Khudika ...

Post Office Salanpur

Sri Krishna Colliery, Post Office
Salanpur.

4,000

543. Kalidaspur ...

Post Office Mejia

Shri M.D. Chatterjee, 2, Thana Road,
Asansol.

4,000

544. Khiratore Khas ...

Post Office Khiratore

Messrs. Sankari Prasad Singh Deo, Post
Office, Panchakot Raj, Purulia.

4,000

545. Khas Jambad ...

Post Office Ukhra

Shri Mohanlal Goenka, Post Office
Ukhra, Burdwan.

11,000

546. Kumarpur ...

Post Office Sitarampur Shri. M.M. Bose Borachak, Post Office
Sitarampur, Burdwan.

4,000

547. Kankartola ...

Post Office Kankartola Kankartola Collieries (Private) Limited,
Post Office Kankartola, Burdwan.

75,000

548. Kasta ...

Post Office Churulia

Kasta Coalfields Limited, 3, Synagogue
Street, Calcutta.

26,000

549. Lachipur ...

Post Office Kajoragram Katras Jherriah Coal Company, 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta-1.

10,53,000

550. Lower Kenda ...

Post Office Kajoragram Khas Kenda Colliery Company (Private)
Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta-1.

5,49,000

551. Lohat ...

Post office Salanpur

Shri Bhuramal Agarwal, Post Office
Salanpur Burdwan.

64,000

Shri Sahadev Dutta, Birbhum.

4,000

Messrs. Chandramal Indra Kumar
(Private) Limited, 3, Synagogue Street,
Calcutta-1.

4,99,000

552. Lakshmi ...
553. Monoharbahal ...

Post Office Asansol

54

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

554. Mukherjee‟s Jote
Janaki ...

Post Office Toposi

555. Madhujore ...

Post Office Kajoragram Madhujore Coal Company (Private)
30,13,000
Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta-1.

556. Mahabir ...

Post Office Raniganj

Mahabir Collieries Limited, 178,
Mahatma Gandhi Road, Calcutta.

1,43,000

557. Moira ...

Post Office Moira
Colliery

Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 9/1,
R.N. Mukherjee Road, Calcutta.

43,15,000

558. Mithapur ...

Post Office Searsole
Rajbari

Shri Nirmal Kumar Geaulecha, 7/2, Babu
Lal Lane, Calcutta-7.

1,59,000

559. Modern Satgram ... Post Office Raniganj

West Bengal Mining Company, Post
Office Raniganj

12,98,000

560. Muslia ...

Post Office Kalipahari

Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited,
Post Office Kalipahari, Burdwan.

60,000

561. Mohanpur ...

Post Office Samdi

S.N. Chaudhury & Company, Kartar
Nivas, Burnpur Road, Asansol.

1,19,000

562. Madhabpur ...

Post Office Ondal

Madhabpur Coal Company, 3,
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.

1,54,000

563. Methani ...

Post Office Sitarampur Equitable Coal Company, 1/2, Lord
Sinha Road, Calcutta.specified

564. Mondal‟s Nandi ... Post Office Nandi

Shri C.R. Mukherjee, Netaji Subhas
Road, Raniganj, Burdwan.

Mondal and Company, Post Office
Dishergarh.

27,000

Amount
included in
the amount
against Sl.
No. 411.
4,000

565. Middle Kajora & Post office Kajoragram Shri K.C. Pal Choudhury, Kajoragram.
Southern Kajora ...

4,000

566. Mondalpur ...

Post Office Nandi

Mondalpur Coal Company Limited, Post
Office Neamatpur.

4,000

567. Mangalpur ...

Post Office Raniganj

New Beerbhoom Coal Company
Limited, Managing Agents M/s. Andrew
Yule and Company Limited, Post Box
150, Calcutta-1.

4,000

Shri M.M. Chatterjee. Ondal.

4,000

568. Sheikhpur ...
569. Mouthdih ...

Post Office Sunderchak Messrs. Mouthdih Coal, Company,
Dishergarh.

55

4,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

570. Madanpur ...

4
Ghanshyam Coal Industries (Private)
Limited, 9 Bhawani Dutta Lane,
Calcutta-7.

5
4,000

571. New Kenda ...

Post Office Toposi

572. North Jambad ...

Post Office Kajoragram North Jambad Coal Company, Post
Office Kajoragram, Burdwan.

98,000

573. North Searsole ...

Post Office Searsole
Rajbari

Searsole Mining and Industries (Private)
Limited, Post Office Searsole Rajbari,
Burdwan.

12,33,000

574. Nag‟s Kajora
Jambad ...

Post Office Ukhra

Shrimati Ashalata Nag and others, 4,
Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta.

3,57,000

575. North Chora ...

Post Office Bahula

Shri B.M. Dutta, North Chora Colliery
Company, Post Office Bahula, Burdwan.

68,000

576. New Jamehari
Khas ...

Post Office
Jaykaynagar

New Jamehari Khas Colliery (Private)
Limited, Post Office Searsole Rajbari
Burdwan.

13,47,000

577. New Satgram ...

Post Office Devchandnagar

Shethia Mining and Manufacturing
Company Limited, 4, Bakul Bagan Row,
„Manohar Mahal‟, Calcutta 25.

18,70,000

578. Nimcha ...

Post Office Raniganj

Nimcha Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 1/1, Rowland Road, Calcutta
20.

3,32,000

579. North Brook ...

Post Office
Jaykaynagar

Shri Bimal Kanti Roy, Post Office
Jaykaynagar.

5,58,000

580. New Ghusick ...

Post Office Kalipahari

West Ghusick Coal Company Limited,
10, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

2,53,000

581. North Charanpur ... Post Office Charanpur

Shri B.N. Ganguly, Ushagram, Post
Office Asansol, Burdwan.

18,000

582. North Ghusick ...

Post Office Majihara

Shri Ganesh Coal Company, Post Office
Asansol, Burdwan.

36,000

583. New Damagoria... Post Office Salanpur
...

New Damagoria Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Salanpur, Burdwan.

4,06,000

584. North East Salanpur Post Office Samdi
...

Shri A.R. Acharyya, Post Office
Heamatpur, Burdwan.

1,28,000

585. North West
Salanpur ...

Shri A.N. Mukherjee and others, Post
Office Samdi, Burdwan.

32,000

Post Office Samdi

New Birbhum Coal Company Limited, 8, 41,23,000
Clive Row, Calcutta-1.

56

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

Location of the mine

2

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

586. New Bhagran ...

Post Office Sitarampur Shri S. Banerjee (Nilachal), Post Office
Baraboni, Burdwan.

4,000

587. North Poniati ...

Post Office Baraboni

Shri B.B. Dutta, Post Office Baraboni,
Burdwan.

18,000

588. New Ardhagram ... Post Office Ardhagram Shri B.P. Singhdeo, Post Office
Panchkotraj, District Purulia.
589. New Bamna ...

Post Office Salanpur

New Bamna Colliery Company, Mehta
Press, Asansol.

4,000
58,000

590. Nakrekonda
Baljuri.
Nabaghanapur
Maheshpur ...

Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 15, Amount
India Exchange Place, Calcutta-1.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 654.

591. Nakrekonda and
Sarpi ...

Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 15, Amount
India Exchange Place, Calcutta- 1.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 654.

592. New South Baraboni ...

Post Office Baraboni

Messrs. Amiya Bala Ghose and Sons,
Post Office Baraboni.

13,000

593. Narsamuda ...

Asansol

Sanpukuria Asansol Colliery Limited, 18
Mission Row, Calcutta.

4,000

594. North Mosila ...

Post Office Kalipahari

North Mosila Colliery Company, Post
Office Kalipahari.

4,000

595. New Begunia ...

Post Office Barakar

Shri S.K. Mukherjee, Barakar.

4,000

596. Nuni ...

Post Office Ethora

Mukherjee P. (Rai Bahadur) G. T. Road
Delhi.

4,000

Shri Jaladhar Mondal, Village Bonbiddi
Post Office, Salanpur.

4,000

597. New Mangalpur ...

598. North Haripur ...

Post Office Ghore

Previously owned by Shri K.L. Dutta,
Amount
Post Office Bahula, Burdwan Dutta Pal included in
and Company, North Haripur Colliery, the amount
Post Office Bahula (Partners-K.L. Dutta specified
and D.N. Pal), Burdwan.
against
Sl.
No. 529.

57

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

599. New Madhapur ...

4

5

A.B. Ojha and Company, 23/B, Netaji
Subhas Road, Calcutta.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 618.

600. New Nandi ...

Post Office Nandi

Shrimati Gayatri Devi, wife of Shri
Subodh Mukherjee, Feeder Road,
Raniganj.

4,000

601. New Jamuria ...

Post Office Nandi

Selected Satgram Collieries. Limited, 18
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.

4,000

602. Palasthali ...

Post Office Churulia

Palasthali Coal Concern (Private)
Limited 53, Mechua Bazar Road,
Chinsura (Hooghly).

8,000

603. Pariarpur ...

Post Office Kalipahari

Shri Shewsiamal Agarwalla, Post Office
Sainthia, Birbhum.

4,000

604. Parbelia ...

Post Office Neturia

Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8 Clive Amount
Row, Calcutta-1.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 432.

605. Patmohana ...

Post Office Patmohana Messrs. Patmohana and Bharatchak
Collieries (Private) Limited, Post Office
Sitarampur, Burdwan.

606. Poidih ...

Post Office Sunderchak Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount
Row, Calcutta-1.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 432.

607. Prossono Dutta‟s
Kajora ...

Post Office Kajoragram Shri P.C. Dutta and Sons, 71A, Netaji
Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

1,30,000

608. Parascole ...

Post Office Kajoragram Parascole Coal Company, 18, Netaji
Subhas Road Calcutta-1.

16,56,000

609. Parasea ...

Post Office Kajoragram Parasea Collieries Company, 25, Netaji
Subhas Road, Calcutta- 1.

29,19,000

610. Proper Kajora ...

Post Office Kajoragram Shri Nimbarak Proper Kajora Coal
Company (Private) Limited, 135, Biplabi
Rash Behari Bose Road Calcutta-1.

1,27,000

58

9,45,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5
*

611. Pure Bansra ...

Post Office Raniganj

612. Pure Jambad ...

Post Office Kajoragram Pure Jambad Colliery Private Limited,
135, Canning Street, Calcutta.

3,52,000

613. Pure Kajora ...

Post Office Kajoragram East Barakar Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta.

6,40,000

614. Pure Kenda ...

Post Office Ukhra

Pure Kenda Coal Company, Post Office
Ukhra, Burdwan.

4,000

615. Pure Searsole ...

Post Office Searsole
Rajbari

Kumari Rani H. Devi, Post Office
Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.

2,48,000

616. Pansuli ...

Post Office Nutandanga Krishna Valley Selected Coal Company,
Post Office Nutandanga.

33,000

617. Pure Samla ...

Post Office Nutandanga Sun Distributors and Mining Company
Limited, 14, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta.

2,78,000

618. Pure Sitalpur ...

Post Office Ukhra

Pure Sitalpur Coal Concern (Private)
Limited 23-B, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta.

619. Pansuli
Nutandanga ...

Post Office Gogla

Shri D.T. Dhanuka, Post Office
Nutandanga, Burdwan.

3,01,000

620. Pottery ...

Post Office Raniganj

Burn & Co., 12, Mission Row, Calcutta.

4,000

621. Pretoria ...

Post Office Charanpur

Seebpor Coal Company Limited, 8,
Clive Row, Calcutta.

4,000

Tara Iron and Steel Company Limited.

4,000

Shri Pandaveswar Coal Company
Limited, Post Office Salanpur, Burdwan.

4,000

624. Poniati Baraboni ... Post Office Charanpur

Shrimati Ashalata Nag and others, 4,
Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta-19.

4,000

625. Premier Nandi ...

Shri Sunil Kumar Mitra, 19/A, Dalimtala
Lane, Calcutta-6.

4,000

622. Purushottampur and
Abhirampur ...
623. Pandaveswar ...

626. Pure Dalurband
(Near Samla
Dalurband) ...

*
†

Post Office Barakar

Post Office Nandi

Pure Kustore Colliery Company Limited, 10,39,000
8, Lyons Range Calcutta.

Pure Dalurband Coal Company, Post
Office Pandveswar, Burdwan.

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI.No. 426.
This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 599 and 681.

59

†

3,50,000

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 660.

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

627. Poniati Mines

Post Office Nandi

Krishna Valley Selected Coal Company,
Post Office Nandi, Burdwan.

11,000

628. Ramjibanpur
(Nag‟s) ...

Post Office Sitarampur Ramjibanpur Coal Company Limited, 4,
Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta.

4,20,000

629. Ranipur ...

Post Office Dishergarh Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2,
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 411.

630. Real Kajora ...

Post Office Kajoragram Real Kajora Colliery Trust, 24, Strand
Road, Calcutta.

1,48,000

631. Real Jambad ...

Post Office Bahula

Oriental Coal Company (Private)
Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta.

4,66,000

632. Ratibati ...

Post Office Kalipahari

West Bengal Mining Company, Post
Office Kalipahari Burdwan.

19,29,000

633. Radhamadhabpur ... Post Office Kalipahari

Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited,
Post Office Kalipahari, Burdwan.

71,000

634. Rana Number 6 Pit Post Office Kalipahari
...

Lodna Colliery Company (1920)
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta.

635. Raniganj ...

Bengal Coal Company, 8, Clive Row,
Calcutta.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 432.

636. Radhaballavpur ... Post Office Samdi

Automotive Manufacturer‟s Agencies,
p- 27, Princep Street, Calcutta-13.

14,000

637. Rangakanali ...

Post Office Samdi

Messrs Surajmal Gupta and others 135,
Biplabi Rashbehari Bose Road, Calcutta1.

82,000

638. Real Salanpur ...

Post Office Salanpur

Salanpur Syndicate Limited, 3,
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.

4,000

639. Real Raniganj ...

Post Office Raniganj

Real Raniganj Coal Company Limited,
Post Office Raniganj.

4,000

640. Real Nandi ...

Post Office Nand

Real Nandi Collieries Limited, 8/2, Hastings Street Calcutta.

4,000

*

Post Office Raniganj

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 669, 670 and 671.

60

*

94,66,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

Location of the mine

2

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

Selected Raniganj Collieries, 21, Ekdalia
Road, Calcutta.

4,000

641. Russa ...

Post Office Russa

642. Sanctoria ...

Post Office Dishergarh Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount
Row, Calcutta.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 432.

643. Seetalpur ...

Post Office Dishergarh Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount
Row, Calcutta.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 432.

644. Sodepur 9 and 10
Pits ...

Post Office Sunderchak Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Amount
Row, Calcutta-1.
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 432.

645. South
Joyramdanga ...

Post Office Asansol

Dishergarh Coal Company Limited, 3,
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.

4,72,000

646. Searsole ...

Post Office Raniganj

Searsole Coal Company Limited, 22,
Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta.

2,61,000

647. Singaran ...

Post Office Toposi

Singaran Coal Syndicate Limited, 237P/lA, Manicktola Main Road, Calcutta.

1,02,000

648. Sitaldassji Selected Post Office
...
Searsole Raj-bari

Messrs. Puranmall Shreeniwas and
Brothers, Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.

2,80,000

649. South Jambad ...

Post Office
Kajoragram

South Parasia Collieries (Private)
Limited, 33, Canning Street, Calcutta-1.

8,000

650. South Parasia ...

Post Office
Kajoragram

South Parasia Collieries (Private)
Limited, 25, Netaji Subhas Road,
Calcutta-1.

1,14,000

651. Samla
Baidyanathpur ...

Post Office
Pandaveswar

Ashoku Mineral and Company, Post
Office Pandaveswar, Burdwan.

2,88,000

652. Samla
Chatrisgonda ...

Post Office
Pandaveswar

Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing
Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta- 1.

2,31,000

61

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

653. Samla Dalurband ... Post Office
Pandaveswar

Samla Dalurband Coal Company
(Private) Limited, Post Office Jharia,
Dhanbad.

654. Samla Manderboni Post Office
...
Pandaveswar

Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 9/1,
R.N. Mukherjee Road, Calcutta-1.

*

655. Samla Kendra ...

Post Office
Pandaveswar

Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing
Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta-1.

11,34,000

656. Samla Pandaveswar Post Office
...
Pandaveswar

Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing
Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta-1.

2,25,000

657. Samla Ramnagar ... Post Office
Pandaveswar

Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing
Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta. .

4,50,000

658. Sarpi Kajora ...

Post Office Ukhra

Sarpi Kajora Coal Mines (Private)
Limited, 33, Canning Street, Calcutta.

6,49,000

659. Selected Kajora
Jambad ...

Post Office
Pandaveswar

Selected Kajora Jambad Colliery, Post
Office Ukhra, Burdwan.

1,31,000

660. Selected Samla

Post Office
Pandaveswar

Selected Dalurband Coal Company
(Private) Limited, 137, Cotton Street,
Calcutta-7.

661. Siduli ...

Post Office Ukhra

Siduli Colliery Company, Post Office
Ukhra, Burdwan.

1,42,000

662. Sitalpur ...

Post Office Siduli

Sitalpur Coal Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office Siduli, Burdwan.

3,02,000

663. South Adjai ...

Post Office Gogla

Gopal Collieries Limited, 174, Mahatma
Gandhi Road, Calcutta-7.

4,000

664. Sunkerpore ...

Post Office Ukhra

Ukhra Minerals (Private) Limited, Post
Office Ukhra, Burdwan.

4,17,000

665. Satgram
(Nageswar) ...

Post Office Searsole
Rajbari

Nageswar Coal Company Kargali
Colliery, Post Office Bermo, Hazaribah.

4,75,000

666. Selected
Searsole ...

Post Office Raniganj

Puranmal Jagannath, Post Office Raniganj.

4,88,000

667. Sri Amritnagar
Selected ...

Post Office Raniganj

Sriniwas and Sons, Post Office Raniganj. 14,41,000

*
†

This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 590 and 591.
This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against 626.

62

6,25,000

24,67,000

†

7,04,000

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

668. Seebpore ...

Post Office Gharanpur

Katras Jherriah Coal Company Limited,
8, Clive Row, Calcutta-I.

4,000

669. Sripur Incline ...

Post Office Kalipahari

Lodna Colliery Company (1920)
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta- I.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 634.

670. Sripur 1, 2 and 3
Pits ...

Post Office Kalipahari

Lodna Colliery Company (1920)
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta-I.

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 634.

671. Sripur 4, 5 and 6
Pits ...

Post Office Kalipahari

Lodna Colliery Company, (1920)
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta-1,

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 634.

672. Samdi Sangramgarh Post Office Samdi
...

B. Hazra and Company, Post Office
Samdi.

3,44,000

673. Shibpur ...

Manish Kumar Mukherjee and Doctor
A.K. Bhattacharjee, Post Office Shibpur,
Burdwan.

4,000

674. Shri Ghanashyam ... Post Office Kajora

Ghanashyam Coal Industries (Private)
Limited, 7, Bhowani Dutt Lane,
Calcutta-7.

53,000

675. Shabanpur ...

Shridhar Mukherjee New Beerbhum
Coal Company, Burdwan.

4,000

676. Selected Kajora ... Post Office Raniganj

Kajora Selected Colliery Company, 135,
Canning Street, Calcutta-I.

4,000

677. Selected
Dhundabad ...

Post Office Salanpur

Selected Dhundabad Colliery Company,
Post Office, Salanpur.

4,000

678. South Nawpara ...

Post Office Ondal

Pure Dishergarh Coal Company Limited,
51 , Garanhatta Lane, Calcutta.

4,000

679. Sitalnagar ...

Post Office Kajoragram Jagannath Buchasia and Others, Purna
Nibash Manison, Raniganj.

4,000

680. Sree ...

Post Office Charanpur

4,000

Post Office Salanpur

Belbaid Colliery Limited, Post Office
Raniganj.

63

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3

4

5

681. Sree Sitalpur ...

Pure Sitalpur Coal Concern, 23/B,
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

682. Selected Banskuri Post Office Mejia
...

Selected Banskuri Colliery Company, 3,
Gangedhar Sarayan, Post Office Raniganj.

4,000

683. Santalmoutha ...

Post Office Neturia

Moutha Dishergarh Coal Company, Post
Office Barakar.

4,000

684. South Kenda ...

Post Office Toposi

South Kenda Coal Company (Ratanlal
Goenka and Surajbhan Ganeriwala), Post
Office Toposi.

15,000

685. Sibdaspur ...

Post Office Salanpur

Sibdaspur Colliery Company, Post
Office Sitarampur, Burdwan.

4,000

686. Selected Jamuria ... Post Office Nandi

A.K. Goswamy, Post Office Birkulti,
Burdwan.

4,000

687. Satpukuria ...

Satpukuria and Asansol Collieries
Limited, 18, Mission Row, Calcutta

4,000

Post Office
Pandavewsar
689. Salanpur A Seam ... Post Office Salanpur

Kalyanji Mavji and Company, 14, Netaji
Subhas Road, Calcutta.

11,000

New Sergarh Coal Company, Post Office
Salanpur Burdwan.

4,000

690. South East BaraboniPost Office Charanpur
Khas ...
691. Shyamsundarpur ... Post Office Ukhra

Bharat Collieries Limited, 11, Clive
Row, Calcutta.

4,000

Burdwan Collieries Limited, 5,
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.

15,000

Post Office Asansol

688. South Samla ...

Amount
included in
the amount
specified
against
Sl.
No. 618.

692. Samla Govindpur ... Post Office Pandaveswar Samla Govnidpur Collieries (Private)
Limited, 33, Canning Street Calcutta-1.

4,000

693. Selected Nandi ...

Post Office Siduli

Jyotsna Devi, Post Office Sitarampur,
Burdwan.

4,000

694. Saltore ...

Post Office Saltore

Barakar Coal Company, Chartered Bank
Building, Calcutta.

4,000

695. Selected Baraboni Post Office Charanpur
...

Selected Baraboni Coal Company
Limited, Post Office Charanpur,
Burdwan.

4,000

696. Toposi ...

Associated Nandi Collieries Limited, 18,
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1.

7,65,000

Post Office Toposi

64

Sl. Name of the mine
No.
1

2

697. Tara ...

Location of the mine

Name and address of owners of the mine Amount (in
rupees)

3
Post Office Birkulti

698. Toposi Koradanga Post Office Toposi
...

4

5

Tara Colliery Limited, 19, Radha Nagar
Road, Burnpur, Asansol.

1,07,000

Toposi Kordanga Coal Concern, Post
Office Topsoi, Burdwan.

4,000

699. Uttar Dhadka ...

Post Office Kajoragram New Beerbhum Coal Company, 8, Clive
Row, Calcutta.

4,000

700. Upper Kajora ...

Post Office Kajoragram Hari Prasad Bhan Singha, 29-A, Sir H.
Goenka Street, Calcutta-7.

4,000

701. Victory Group ...

Post Office Nutandanga Coal Products (Private) Limited, 3,
Bankshall Street, Calcutta.

702. Visheshari Khandra Post Office Ukhra
...

N.H. Ohja and Company, Gillander‟s
House, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.

12,55,000
9,37,000

703. Viceroy (Mandal‟s) Post Office Dishergarh B.N. Mandal and Company, Parekh‟s
...
Building, 22 Canning Street, Calcutta.

4,000

704. Western Kajora ... Post Office Kajoragram Western Kajora Collieries (Private)
Limited, 178, Mahatma Gandhi Road,
Calcutta.

2,37,000

705. West Baraboni ...

Post Office Raghunath
Chak

Modern Coal Trading Company (Private)
Limited, Post Office, Raghunath Chak,
Burdwan.

71,000

706. West Palasiha ...

Post Office Asansol

P.K. Agarwala and others (B.L.
Agarwala and Sons), Post Office Jharia.

4,000

707. West Jamuria ...

Post Office Charanpur

West Jamuria Coal Company Limited, 2,
Brabourne Road, Calcutta.

4,000

Darjeeling Coalfield
708. Dalingkota ...

Post Office Pillan‟s Hat Himalaya Coal and Mineral Industries,
Post Office, Bagrakote , Darjeeling.

4,000

709. East Bagrakote ...

Post Office Pillan‟s Hat Dalingkote Colliery, Post Office, Pillan‟s
Hat, Darjeeling.

4,000

710. Cagu ...

Post Office Manabari

Choudhury and Chakravarty Chaturbhati,
Post Office, Bagrakote.

4,000

711. Lithi Valley ...

Post Office Fagu

B.D. Sharma, Darjeeling

4,000

Explanation.—In this Schedule, wherever any amount, specified in the fifth column against a coal
mine, has been declared in the footnotes to include also the amount payable in relation to one or more
other coal mines, all the coal mines in relation to which such amount has been specified in the said
column as payable, shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to constitute a group of coal mines.

65

THE LAND ACQUISITION
ACT, 1894
(1 OF 1894)
(As modified up to the Ist September, 1985)
Subordinate legislation – being published separately)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF Law and Justice

THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT, 1894
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
__________
PART I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS:
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. (Repealed)
3. Definitions.
PART II
ACQUISITION
Preliminary investigation
4. Publication of preliminary notification and powers of officers there upon.
5. Payment for damage.
Objections
5A. Hearing of objections.
Declaration of intended acquisition
6.Declaration that land is required for a public purpose.

7.After declaration, Collector to take order for acquisition.
8.Land to be marked out, measured and planned.
9.Notice to persons interested.
10.Power to require and enforce the making of Statements as to names and interests.
Enquiry into measurements, value and claims, and award by the Collector.

11.Enquiry and award by Collector.
11A. Period within which an award shall be made.
12.Award of Collector when to be final.
13. Adjournment of enquiry.
13A. Correction of clerical errors, etc.
14. Power to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses and production of documents.

15. Matters to be considered and neglected.
15A. Power to call for records, etc.
Taking possession

16.Power to take possession.
17.Special powers in cases of urgency.
PART III
Reference to court and procedure thereon.
SECTIONS.

18. Reference to Court.
19. Collector’s statement to the Court.
20. Service of notice
21. Restriction on scope of proceedings.

22. Proceedings to be in open Court.
23. Matters to be considered in determining compensation.
24. Matters to be neglected in determining compensation.
25. Amount of compensation awarded by Court not to be lower than the amount awarded by the Collector.
26. Form of awards.
27. Costs.
28. Collector may be directed
28A. Re-determination of the amount of compensation on the basis of the award of the Court.
PART IV
APPORTIONMENT OF COMPENSATION

29. Particulars of apportionment to be specified.
30. Dispute as to apportionment.
PART V
PAYMENT

31.Payment of compensation or deposit of same in Court.
32.Investment of money deposited in respect of lands belonging to persons incompetent to alienate.
33.Investment of money deposited in other cases.
34.Payment of interest.
PART VI
TEMPORARY OCCUPATION OF LAND

35. Temporary occupation of waste or arable land. Procedure when difference as to compensation exists.

36.Power to enter and take possession, and compensation on restoration.
37.Difference as to condition of land.
PART VII
ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR COMPANIES
SECTIONS

38(Repealed)
38A. Industrial concern to be deemed Company for certain purposes.

39. Previous consent of appropriate Government and execution of agreement necessary.

40. Previous enquiry.
41.Agreement with appropriate Government.
42.Publication of agreement.
43. Sections 39 to 42 not to apply where Government bound by agreement to provide land for Companies.

44. How agreement with Railway Company may be proved.
44A. Restriction on transfer etc.
44B. Land not to be acquired under this Part except for certain purpose for private companies other than
Government companies.
PART VIII
MISCELLANEOUS

45. Service of notices.
46. Penalty for obstructing acquisition of land.
47. Magistrate to enforce surrender.

48. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not completed.

49. Acquisition of part of house or building.
50. Acquisition of land at cost of a local authority or Company.
51. Exemption from stamp-duty and fees.
51A. Acceptance of certified copy as evidence.

52. Notice in case of suits for anything done in pursuance of Act.
53. Code of Civil Procedure to apply to proceedings before Court.
54.Appeals in proceedings before Court.
55.Power to make rules.

THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT,1894
PART 1:
Preliminary

1.Short title, extent and commencement(1) This Act may be called the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except (the state of Jammu and Kashmir).
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of March 1894.
2. [Repeal and Saving] Rep. Partly by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (10 of 1914), s.3 and Sch. II, and
partly by the Repealing act, 1938 (1 of 1938) s.2 and Sch.
3. Definitions. - In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, (a) the expression “land” includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently
fastened to anything attached to the earth;
[(aa) the expression “local authority” includes a town planning authority (by whatever name called) set up under any
law for the time being in force];
(b) the expression “person interested” includes all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on

account of the acquisition of land under this Act; and a person shall be deemed to be interested in land if he is
interested in an easement affecting the land;
(c) the expression “Collector” means the Collector of a district, and includes a Deputy Commissioner and any
officer specially appointed by the [appropriate Government] to perform the functions of a Collector under this Act;
[(cc) the expression “corporation owned or controlled by the “State” means any body corporate established by or
under a Central, Provincial or State Act, and includes a Government company as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), a society registered under the Societies Regulation Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or
under any corresponding law for the time being in force in a State, being a society established or administered by
Government and a co-operative society within the meaning of any law relating to co-operative societies for the time
being in force in any State, being a co-operative society in which not less than fifty-one per centum of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Central Government, or by any State Government or Governments or partly by the
Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments].
(d) the expression “Court” means a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction unless, the [appropriate
Government] has appointed (as it is hereby empowered to do) a special judicial officer within any specified local
limits to perform functions of the Court under this Act;
[(e) the expression “Company” means (i) a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), other than a Government company
referred to in clause (cc);
(ii) a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or under any corresponding law for
the time being in force in a State, other than a society referred to in clause (cc);
(iii) a co-operative society within the meaning of any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in
force in any State, other than a co-operative society referred to in clause (cc);]
[(ee) the expression “appropriate Government” means, in relating to acquisition of land for the purposes of the
Union, the Central Government, and, in relation to acquisition of land for any other purposes, the State
Government;]
[(f) the expression “public purpose” includes(i) the provision of village-sites, or the extension, planned development or improvement of existing village-sites;
(ii) the provision of land for town or rural planning;
(iii) the provision of land for planned development of land from public funds in pursuance of any scheme or policy
of Government and subsequent disposal thereof in whole or in part by lease, assignment or outright sale with the
object of securing further development as planned;
(iv) the provision of land for a corporation owned or controlled by the State;
(v) the provision of land for residential purposes to the poor or landless or to persons residing in areas affected by
natural calamities, or to persons displaced or affected by reason of the implementation of any scheme undertaken by
Government, any local authority or a corporation owned or controlled by the State;
(vi) the provision of land for carrying out any educational, housing, health or slum clearance scheme sponsored by
Government or by any authority established by Government for carrying out any such scheme, or with the prior
approval of the appropriate Government, by a local authority, or a society registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or under any corresponding law for the time being in force in a state, or a co-operative
society within the meaning of any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State;

(vii) the provision of land for any other scheme of development sponsored by Government or with the prior
approval of the appropriate Government, by a local authority;
(viii) the provision of any premises or building for locating a public office, but does not include acquisition of land
for companies;]

(g) the following persons shall be deemed person “entitled to act” as and to the extent hereinafter provided (that is to
say)trustees for other persons beneficially interested shall be deemed the person entitled to act with reference to any such
case, and that to the same extent as the person beneficially interested could have acted if free from disability.
a married woman, in cases to which the English law is applicable, shall be deemed the persons, so entitled to act,
and whether of full age or not, to the same extent as if she were unmarried and of full age; and
the guardians of minors and the committees or managers of lunatics or idiots shall be deemed respectively the
persons so entitled to act, to the same extent as the minors, lunatics or idiots themselves, if free from disability,
could have acted:
Provided that –
(i) no person shall be deemed “entitled to act” whose interest in the subject matter shall be shown to the satisfaction
of the Collector or court to be adverse to the interest of the person interested for whom he would otherwise be
entitled to act;
(ii) in every such case the person interested may appear by a next friend or, in default of his appearance by a next
friend, the Collector or Court, as the case may be, shall appoint a guardian for the case to act on his behalf in the
conduct thereof;
(iii) the provisions of [Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall,
mutatis mutandis, apply in the case of persons interested appearing before a Collector or Court by a next friend, or
by a guardian for the case, in proceedings under this Act; and
(iv) no person “entitled to act” shall be competent to receive the compensation money payable to the person for
whom he is entitled to act, unless he would have been competent to alienate the land and receive and give a good
discharge for the purchase money on a voluntary sale.
PART II

Acquisition
Preliminary investigation
4. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers thereupon. (1) Whenever it appears to the [appropriate Government] the land in any locality [is needed or] is likely to be needed
for any public purpose [or for a company], a notification to that effect shall be published in the Official Gazette [and
in two daily newspapers circulating in that locality of which at least one shall be in the regional language], and the
Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of such notification to be given at convenient places in the said
locality [(the last of the dates of such publication and the giving of such public notice , being hereinafter referred to
as the date of the publication of the notification)].

(2) Thereupon it shall be lawful for any officer, either generally or specially authorized by such Government in this
behalf, and for his servants and workman, to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality;
to dig or bore into the sub-soil;
to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is adapted for such purpose;
to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be taken and the intended line of the work (if any) proposed to be
made thereon;
to mark such levels, boundaries and line by placing marks and cutting trenches;
and, where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the levels taken and the boundaries and line marked, to
cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle;
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or garden attached to a dwelling
house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such occupier at least seven days'
notice in writing of his intention to do so.
5. Payment for damage. - The officer so authorized shall at the time of such entry pay or tender payment for all
necessary damaged to be done as aforesaid, and, in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or
tendered, he shall at once refer the dispute to the decision of the Collector or other chief revenue officer of the
district, and such decision shall be final.
[Objections
5A. Hearing of objections. - (1) Any person interested in any land which has been notified under section 4, subsection (1), as being needed or likely to be needed for a public purpose or for a Company may, [within thirty days
from the date of the publication of the notification], object to the acquisition of the land or of any land in the
locality, as the case may be.
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Collector in writing, and the Collector shall give the
objector an opportunity of being heard [in person or by any person authorized by him in this behalf] or by pleader
and shall, after hearing all such objections and after making such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary,
[either make a report in respect of the land which has been notified under section 4, sub-section (1), or make
different reports in respect of different parcels of such land, to the appropriate Government, containing his
recommendations on the objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him, for the decision of that
Government]. The decision of the [appropriate Government] on the objections shall be final.
(3) For the purpose of this section, a person shall be deemed to be interested in land who would be entitled to claim
an interest in compensation if the land were acquired under this Act.]
Declaration of intended acquisition
6. Declaration that land is required for a public purpose. - (1) Subject to the provision of Part VII of this Act,
[appropriate Government] is satisfied, after considering the report, if any, made under section 5A, sub-section (2)],
that any particular land is needed for a public purpose, or for a Company, a declaration shall be made to that effect
under the signature of a Secretary to such Government or of some officer duly authorized to certify its orders [and
different declarations may be made from time to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered by the same
notification under section 4, sub-section (I) irrespective of whether one report or different reports has or have been
made (wherever required) under section 5A, sub-section (2)];
[Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land covered by a notification under section 4, sub-section
(1)-

(i) published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967 (1 of
1967), but before the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 (68 of 1984), shall be made
after the expiry of three years from the date of the publication of the notification; or
(ii) published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 (68 of 1984), shall be made
after the expiry of one year from the date of the publication of the notification:]
Provided further that] no such declaration shall be made unless the compensation to be awarded for such property is
to be paid by a Company, or wholly or partly out of public revenues or some fund controlled or managed by a local
authority.
[Explanation 1. - In computing any of the periods referred to in the first proviso, the period during which any action
or proceeding to be taken in pursuance of the notification issued under section 4, sub-section (1), is stayed by an
order of a Court shall be excluded.
Explanation 2. - Where the compensation to be awarded for such property is to be paid out of the funds of a
corporation owned or controlled by the State, such compensation shall be deemed to be compensation paid out of
public revenues.]
(2) [Every declaration] shall be published in the Official Gazette [and in two daily newspapers circulating in the
locality in which the land is situated of which at least one shall be in the regional language, and the Collector shall
cause public notice of the substance of such declaration to be given at convenient places in the said locality (the last
of the dates of such publication and the giving of such public notice, being hereinafter referred to as the date of the
publication of the declaration), and such declaration shall state] the district or other territorial division in which the
land is situate, the purpose for which It is needed, its approximate area, and, where a plan shall have been made of
the land, the place where such plan may be inspected.
(3) The said declaration shall be conclusive evidence that the land is needed for a public purpose or for a company,
as the case may be; and, after making such declaration, the [appropriate Government] may acquire the land in
manner hereinafter appearing.
7. After declaration, Collector to take order for acquisition. - Whenever any land shall have been so declared to be
needed for public purpose, or for a Company, the [appropriate Government], or some officer authorized by the
[appropriate Government] in this behalf, shall direct the Collector to take order for the acquisition of the land.
8. Land to be marked out, measured and planned. - The Collector shall thereupon cause the land (unless it has been
already marked out under section 4) to be market out. He shall also cause it to be measured, and (if no plan has been
made thereof), a plan to be made of the same.
9. Notice to persons interested. - (1) The Collector shall then cause public notice to be given at convenient places on
or near the land to be taken, stating that the Government intends to take possession of the land, and that claims to
compensations for all interests in such land may be made to him.
(2) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land so needed, and shall require all persons interested in the land to
appear personally or by agent before the Collector at a time and place therein mentioned (such time not being earlier
than fifteen days after the date of publication of the notice), and to state the nature of their respective interests in the
land and the amount and particulars of their claims to compensation for such interests, and their objections (if any)
to the measurements made under section 8. The Collector may in any case require such statement to be made in
writing and signed by the party or his agent.
(3) The Collector shall also serve notice to the same effect on the occupier (if any) of such land and on all such
persons known or believed to be interested therein, or to entitled to act for persons so interested, as reside or have
agents authorized to receive service on their behalf, within the revenue district in which the land is situate.
(4) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, and has no such agent, the notice shall be sent to him by post

in letter addressed to him at his last known residence, address or place or business and [registered under sections 28
and 29 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (6 of 1898)].
10. Power to require and enforce the making of statements as to names and interests. (1) The Collector may also require any such person to make or deliver to him, at a time and place mentioned (such
time not being earlier than fifteen days after the date of the requisition), a statement containing, so far as may be
practicable, the name of every other person possessing any interest in the land or any part thereof as co-proprietor,
sub-proprietor, mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and of the nature of such interest, and of the rents and profits (if
any), received or receivable on account thereof for three years next preceding the date of the statement.
(2) Every person required to make or deliver a statement under this section 9 shall be deemed to be legally bound to
do so within the meaning of sections 175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Enquiry into measurements, value and claims, and award by the Collector
11. Enquiry and award by Collector. - [(1)] On the day so fixed, or on any other day to which the enquiry has been
adjourned, the Collector shall proceed to enquire into the objection (if any) which any person interested has stated
pursuant to a notice given under section 9 to the measurements made under section 8, and into the value of the land
[at the date of the publication of the notification under section 4, sub-section (1)], and into the respective interests of
the persons claiming the compensation and shall make an award under his hand of(i) the true area of the land;
(ii) the compensation which in his opinion should be allowed for the land; and
(iii) the apportionment of the said compensation among all the persons known or believed to be interested in the
land, or whom, or of whose claims, he has information, whether or not they have respectively appeared before him :
[Provided that no award shall be made by the Collector under this sub-section without the previous approval of the
appropriate Government or of such officer as the appropriate Government may authorize in this behalf:
Provided further that it shall be competent for the appropriate Government to direct that the Collector may make
such award without such approval in such class of cases as the appropriate Government may specify in this behalf.
[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if at any stage of the proceedings, the Collector is
satisfied that all the persons interested in the land who appeared before him have agreed in writing on the matters to
be included in the award of the Collector in the form prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government, he
may, without making further enquiry, make an award according to the terms of such agreement.
(3) The determination of compensation for any land under sub-section (2) shall not in any way affect the
determination of compensation in respect of other lands in the same locality or elsewhere in accordance with the
other provisions of this Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), no agreement made under subsection (2) shall be liable to registration under that Act.]
[11A. Period shall be which an award within made. - The Collector shall make an award under section 11 within a
period of two years from the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within that period, the
entire proceeding for the acquisition of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said declaration has been published before the commencement of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 (68 of 1984), the award shall be made within a period of two years from such
commencement.
Explanation - In computing the period of two years referred to in this section, the period during which any action or

proceeding to be taken in pursuance of the said declaration is stayed by an order of a Court shall be excluded.]
12. Award of Collector when to be final. - (1) Such award shall be filed in the Collector's office and shall, except as
hereinafter provided, be final and conclusive evidence, as between the Collector and the persons interested, whether
they have respectively appeared before the Collector or not, of the true area and value of the land, and the
appointment of the compensation among the persons interested.
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of his award to such of the persons interested as are not present
personally or by their representatives when the award is made.
13. Adjournment of enquiry. - The Collector may, for any cause he thinks fit, from time to time adjourn the enquiry
to a day to be fixed by him.
[13A. Correction of clerical errors, etc. - (1) The Collector may, at any time but not later than six months from the
date of the award, or where he has been required under section 18 to make a reference to the Court, before the
making of such reference, by order, correct any clerical or arithmetical mistakes in the award or errors arising
therein either on his own motion or on the application of any person interested or a local authority:
Provided that no correction, which is likely to affect prejudicially any person, shall be made unless such person has
been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in the matter.
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any correction made in the award to all the persons interested.
(3) Where any excess amount is proved to have been paid to any person as a result of the correction made under subsection (1), the excess amount so paid shall be liable to be refunded and in the case of any default or refusal to pay,
the same may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.]
14. Power to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses and production of documents. - For the purpose of
enquiries under this Act the Collector shall have powers to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses,
including the parties interested of any of them, and to compel the production of documents by the same means, and
(so far as may be) in the same manner as is provided in the case of a Civil Court under the 1[Code of Civil
Procedure 1908 (5 of 1908)].
15. Matters to be considered and neglected. - In determining the amount of compensation, the collector shall be
guided by the provisions contained in section 23 and 24.
[15A Power to call for records, etc. - The appropriate Government may at any time before the award is made by the
Collector under section 11 call for any record of any proceedings (whether by way of inquiry or otherwise) for the
purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any findings or order passed or as to the regularity of
such proceedings and may pass such order or issue such direction in relation thereto as it may think fit:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall not pass or issue any order or direction prejudicial to any person
without affording such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]
Taking Possession
16. Power to take possession. - When the Collector has made an award under section 11, he may take possession of
the land, which shall thereupon [vest absolutely in the [Government]], free from all encumbrances.
17. Special powers in case of urgency. – (1) In cases of urgency whenever the [appropriate Government], so directs,
the Collector, though no such award has been made, may, on the expiration of fifteen days from the publication of
the notice mentioned in section 9, sub-section 1). [take possession of any land needed for a public purpose]. Such
land shall thereupon [vest absolutely in the [Government], free from all encumbrances.
(2) Whenever, owing to any sudden change in the channel of any navigable river or other unforeseen emergency, it
becomes necessary for any Railway Administration to acquire the immediate possession of any land for the

maintenance of their traffic or for the purpose of making thereon a river-side or ghat station, or of providing
convenient connection with or accesses to any such station, [or the appropriate Government considers it necessary to
acquire the immediate possession of any land for the purpose of maintaining any structure or system pertaining to
irrigation, water supply, drainage, road communication or electricity,] the Collector may immediately after the
publication of the notice mentioned in sub-section (1) and with the previous sanction of the [appropriate
Government], enter upon and take possession of such land, which shall thereupon [vest absolutely in the
[Government]] free from all encumbrances :
Provided that the Collector shall not take possession of any building or part of a building under this sub-section
without giving to the occupier thereof at least forty-eight hours notice of his intention so to do, or such longer notice
as may be reasonably sufficient to enable such occupier to remove his movable property from such building without
unnecessary inconvenience.
(3) In every case under either of the preceding sub-sections the Collector shall at that time of taking possession offer
to the persons interested compensation for the standing crops and trees (if any) on such land and from any other
damage sustained by them caused by such sudden dispossession and not excepted in section 24; and, in case such
offer is not accepted, the value of such crops and trees and the amount of such other damage shall be allowed for in
awarding compensation for the land under the provisions herein contained.
3[(3A) Before taking possession of any land under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Collector shall, without
prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3)(a) tender payment of eighty per centum of the compensation for such land as estimated by him to the person
interested entitled thereto, and
(b) pay it to them, unless prevented by some one or more of the contingencies mentioned in section 31, sub-section
(2),
and where the Collector is so prevented, the provisions of section 31, sub-section (2), (except the second proviso
thereto), shall apply as they apply to the payment of compensation under that section.
(3B) The amount paid or deposited under section (3A), shall be taken into account for determining the amount of
compensation required to be tendered under section 31, and where the amount so paid or deposited exceeds the
compensation awarded by the Collector under section 11, the excess may, unless refunded within three months from
the date of Collector's award, be recovered as an arrear of land revenue].
[(4) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion of the [appropriate Government], the provisions of sub-section
(1) or sub-section (2) are applicable, the [appropriate Government] may direct that the provisions of section 5A shall
not apply, and, if it does so direct, a declaration may be made under section 6 in respect of the land at any time [after
the date of the publication of the notification] under section 4, sub-section (1).]
PART III

Reference to Court and Procedure Thereon
18. Reference to Court. - (1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by
written application to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court, whether his objection be to the measurement of the land, the amount
of the compensation, the person to whom it is payable, or the apportionment of the compensation
among the persons interested.
(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken:

Provided that every such application shall be made(a) if the person making it was present or represented before the Collector at the time when he
made his award, within six weeks from the date of the Collector's award;
(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector under section
12, sub-section (2), or within six months from the date of the Collector's award, whichever
period shall first expire.
19. Collector's statement to the court. - (1) In making the reference, the Collector shall state for
the information of the court, in writing under his hand (a) the situation and extent of the land, with particulars of any trees, buildings or standing crops
thereon;
(b) the names of the persons whom he has reason to think interested in such land;
(c) the amount awarded for damages and paid or tendered under sections 5 and 17, or either of
them, and the amount of compensation awarded under section 11;
[(cc) the amount paid or deposited under sub-section (3A) of section 17; and]
(d) if the objection be to the amount of the compensation, the grounds on which the amount of
compensation was determined.
(2) To the said statement shall be attached a schedule giving the particulars of the notices served
upon, and of the statements in writing made or delivered by the parties interested respectively.
20. Service of notice. - The Court shall thereupon cause a notice specifying the day on which the
Court will proceed to determine the objection, and directing their appearance before the Court on
that day, to be served on the following persons, namely: (a) the applicant;
(b) all persons interested in the objection, except such (if any) of them as have consented without
protest to receive payment of the compensation awarded; and
(c) If the objection is in regard to the area of the land or to the amount of the compensation, the
Collector.
21. Restriction on scope of proceedings. - The scope of the enquiry in every such proceeding
shall be restricted to a consideration of the interest of the persons affected by the objection.
22. Proceedings to be in open Court. - Every such proceeding shall take place in open Court, and
all persons entitled to practice in any Civil Court in the State shall be entitled to appear, plea and

act (as the case may be) in such proceeding.
23. Matters to be considered on determining compensation. - (1) In determining the amount of
compensation to be awarded for land acquired under this Act, the Court shall take into
considerationfirst, the market-value of the land at the date of the publication of the [notification under section
4, sub-section (1)];
secondly, the damage sustained by the person interested, by reason of the taking of any standing
crops trees which may be on the land at the time of the Collector's taking possession thereof;
thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at the time of the Collector's
taking possession of the land, by reason of serving such land from his other land;
fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at the time of the Collector's
taking possession of the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other
property, movable or immovable, in any other manner, or his earnings;
fifthly, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the Collector, the person interested is
compelled to change his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if any)
incidental to such change, and
sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminution of the profits of the land
between the time of the publication of the declaration under section 6 and the time of the
Collector's taking possession of the land.
[(1A) In addition to the market value of the land, as above provided, the Court shall in every case
award an amount calculated at the rate of twelve per centum per annum on such market value for
the period commencing on and from the date of the publication of the notification under section
4, sub-section (1), in respect of such land to the date of the award of the Collector or the date of
taking possession of the land, whichever is earlier.
Explanation. - In computing the period referred to in this sub-section, any period or periods
during which the proceedings for the acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay
or injunction by the order of any Court shall be excluded.]
(2) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided, the Court shall in every case
award a sum of [thirty per centum] on such market value, in consideration of the compulsory
nature of the acquisition.
24. Matters to be neglected in determining compensation. - But the Court shall not take into
consideration first, the degree of urgency which has led to the acquisition;

secondly, any disinclination of the person interested to part with the land acquired;
thirdly, any damage sustained by him which, if caused by a private person, would not render
such person liable to a suit;
fourthly, any damage which is likely to be caused to the land acquired, after the date of the
publication of the declaration under section 6, by or in consequence of the use to which it will be
put;
fifthly, any increase to the value of the land acquired likely to accrue from the use to which it
will be put when acquired;
sixthly, any increase to the value of the other land of the person interested likely to accrue from
the use to which the land acquired will be put;
seventhly, any outlay or improvements on, or disposal of the land acquired, commenced, made or
effected without the sanction of the Collector after the date of the publication of the [notification
under section 4, sub-section (1); [or]
[eighthly, any increase to the value of the land on account of its being put to any use, which is
forbidden by law or opposed to public policy.]
[25. Amount of compensation awarded by Court not to be lower than the amount awarded by the
Collector. - The amount of compensation awarded by the Court shall not be less than the amount
awarded by the Collector under section 11.]
26. Forms of awards. - [(1)] Every award under this part shall be in writing signed by the Judge,
and shall specify the amount awarded under clause first of sub-section (1) of section 23, and also
the amounts (if any) respectively awarded under each of the other clauses of the same subsection, together with the grounds of awarding each of the said amounts.
[(2) Every such award shall be deemed to be a decree and the statement of the grounds of every
such award a judgment within the meaning of section 2. clause (2), and section 2, clause (9),
respectively of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (5 of 1908).]
27. Costs. - (1) Every such award shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the proceeding
under this Part, and by what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.
(2) When the award of the Collector is not upheld, the cost shall ordinarily be paid by the
Collector, unless the Court shall be opinion that the claim of the applicant was so extravagant or
that he was so negligent in putting his case before the Collector that some deduction from his
costs should be made or that he should pay a part of the Collector's costs.
28. Collector may be directed to pay interest on excess compensation. - If the sum, which the
Collector did award as compensation, the award of the Court may direct that the collector shall
pay interest on such excess at the rate of [nine per centum] per annum from the date on which he

took possession of the land to the date of payment of such excess into Court:
[Provided that the award of the Court may also direct that where such excess or any part thereof
is paid into Court after the date or expiry of a period of one year from the date on which
possession is taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per centum per annum shall be payable from the
date of expiry of the said period of one year on the amount of such excess or part thereof which
has not been paid into Court before the date of such expiry.]
[28A. Re-determination of the amount of compensation on the basis of the award of the Court. (1) where in an award under this part, the court allows to the applicant any amount of
compensation in excess of the amount awarded by the collector under section 11, the persons
interested in all the other land covered by the same notification under section 4, sub-section (1)
and who are also aggrieved by the award of the Collector may, notwithstanding that they had not
made an application to the Collector under section 18, by written application to the Collector
within three months from the date of the award of the Court require that the amount of
compensation payable to them may be re-determined on the basis of the amount of compensation
awarded by the court:
Provided that in computing the period of three months within which an application to the
Collector shall be made under this sub-section, the day on which the award was pronounced and
the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded.
(2) The Collector shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), conduct an inquiry
after giving notice to all the persons interested and giving them a reasonable opportunity of being
heard, and make an award determining the amount of compensation payable to the applicants.
(3) Any person who has not accepted the award under sub-section (2) may, by written
application to the Collector, required that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court and the provisions of sections 18 to 28 shall, so far as may be, apply
to such reference as they apply to a reference under section 18.]
PART IV

Appointment of Compensation
29. Particulars of apportionment to be specified. - When there are several persons interested, if
such persons agree in the apportionment of the compensation, the particulars of such
apportionment shall be specified in the award, and as between such persons the award shall be
conclusive evidence of the correctness of the apportionment.
30. Dispute as to apportionment. - When the amount of compensation has been settled under
section 11, if any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the same or any part thereof, or as to
the persons to whom the same or any part thereof, is payable, the Collector may refer such
dispute to the decision of the Court.
PART V

Payment
31. Payment of compensation or deposit of same in Court. - (1) On making an award under
section 11, the Collector shall tender payment of the compensation awarded by him to the
persons interested entitled thereto according to the award and shall pay it to them unless
prevented by some one or more of the contingencies mentioned in the next sub-section.
(2) If they shall not consent to receive it, or if there be no person competent to alienate the land,
or if there be any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to the apportionment of
it, the Collector shall deposit the amount of the compensation in the Court to which a reference
under section 18 would be submitted:
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such payment under protest as to
the sufficiency of the amount:
Provided also that no person who has received the amount otherwise than under protest shall be
entitled to make any application under section 18:
Provided also that nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any person, who may
receive the whole or any part of any compensation awarded under this Act, to pay the same to
the person lawfully entitled thereto.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this section the Collector may, with the sanction of the
[appropriate Government] instead of awarding a money compensation in respect of any land,
make any arrangement with a person having a limited interest in such land, either by the grant of
other lands in exchange, the remission of land-revenue on other lands held under the same title,
or in such other way as may be equitable having regard to the interests of the parties concerned.
(4) Nothing in the last foregoing sub-section shall be construed to interfere with or limit the
power of the Collector to enter into any arrangement with any person interested in the land and
competent to contract in respect thereof.
32. Investment of money deposited in respect of lands belonging to person incompetent to
alternate. - (1) If any money shall be deposited in Court under sub-section (2) of the last
preceding section and it appears that the land in respect whereof the same was awarded belonged
to any person who had no power to alienate the same, the Court shall(a) order the money to be invested in the purchase of other lands to be held under the like title
and conditions of ownership as the land in respect of which such money shall have been
deposited was held, or
(b) if such purchase cannot be effected forthwith, then in such Government of other approved
securities as the Court shall think fit;
and shall direct the payment of the interest or other proceeds arising from such investment to the
person or persons who would for the time being have been entitled to the possession of the said

land, and such moneys shall remain so deposited and invested until the same be applied(i) in the purchase of such other lands as aforesaid; or
(ii) in payment to any person or persons becoming absolutely entitled thereto.
(2) In all cases of money deposited to which this section applies the Court shall order the costs of
the following matters, including therein all reasonable charge and expenses incident thereon, to
be paid by the Collector, namely: (a) the costs of such investments as aforesaid;
(b) the costs of the orders for the payment of the interest or other proceeds of the securities upon
which such moneys are for the time being invested, and for the payment out of Court of the
principal of such moneys, and of all proceedings relating thereto, except such as may be
occasioned by litigation between adverse claimants.
33. Investment of money deposited in other cases. - When any money shall have been deposited
in Court under this Act for any cause other than mentioned in the last proceeding section, the
court may, on the application of any party interested or claiming an interest in such money, order
the same to be invested in such Government or other approved securities as it may think proper,
and paid in such manner as it may consider will give the parties interested therein the same
benefit the reform as they might have had from the land in respect whereof such money shall
have been deposited or as near thereto as may be.
34. Payment of interest - When the amount of such compensation is not paid or deposited on or
before taking possession of the land, the Collector shall pay the amount awarded with interest
thereon at the rate of [nine per centum] per annum from the time of so taking possession until it
shall have been so paid or deposited:
[Provided that if such compensation or any part thereof is not paid or deposited within a period
of one year from the date on which possession is taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per centum
per annum shall be payable from the date or expiry of the said period of one year on the amount
of compensation or part thereof which has not been paid or deposited before the date of such
expiry.]

PART VI

TEMPORARY OCCUPATION OF LAND
35. Temporary occupation of waste or arable land. Procedure when difference as to compensation exists. - (1)
Subject to the provisions of Part VII of this Act, whenever it appears to the [appropriate Government] that the
temporary occupation and use of any waste or arable land are needed for any public purpose, or for a Company, the
[appropriate Government] may direct the Collector to procure the occupation and use of the same for such term as it

shall think fit, not exceeding three years from the commencement of such occupation.
(2) The Collector shall thereupon give notice in writing to the person interested in such land of the purpose for
which the same is needed, and shall, for the occupation and use thereof for such term as aforesaid, and for the
materials (if any) to be taken there from, pay to them such compensation, either in a gross sum of money, or by
monthly or other periodical payments, as shall be agreed upon in writing between him and such persons
respectively.
(3) In case the Collector and the persons interested differ as to the sufficiency of the compensation or apportionment
thereof, the Collector shall refer such difference to the decision of the Court.
36. Power to enter and take possession and compensation on restoration. - (1) On payment of such compensation, or
on executing such agreement, or on making a reference under section 35, the collector may enter upon and take
possession of the land, and use or permit the use thereof in accordance with the terms of the said notice.
(2) On the expiration of the term, the Collector shall make or tender to the persons interested compensation for the
damage (if any) done to the land and not provided for by the agreement, and shall restore the land to the persons
interested therein:
Provided that, if the land has become permanently unfit to be used for the purpose for which it was used
immediately before the commencement of such term, and if the persons interested shall so require, the [appropriate
Government] shall proceed under this Act to acquire the land as if it was needed permanently for a public purpose or
for a Company.
37. Difference as to condition of land. - In case the Collector and persons interested differ as to the condition of the
land at the expiration of the term, or as to any matter connected with the said agreement, the Collector shall refer
such difference to the decision of the Court.

PART VII

Acquisition of Land for Companies
38. [Company may be authorized to enter and survey]. Rep. by the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act, 1984 (68 of 1984), s.21.
[38A. Industrial concern to be deemed Company for certain purposes. - An industrial concern,
ordinarily employing not less than one hundred workmen owned by an individual or by an
association of individuals and not being a Company, desiring to acquire land for the erection of
dwelling houses for workmen employed by the concern or for the provision of amenities directly
connected therewith shall, so far as concerns the acquisition of such land, be deemed to be a
Company for the purposes of this Part, and the references to Company in [selections 4, 5A, 6, 7
and 50] shall be interpreted as references also to such concern]
39. Previous consent of appropriate Government and execution of agreement necessary. - The
provisions of [sections 6 to 16 (both inclusive) and sections 18 to 37 (both inclusive)] shall not
be put in force in order to acquire land for any company [under this Part], unless with the
previous consent of the [appropriate Government], not unless the Company shall have executed
the agreement hereinafter mentioned.

40. Previous enquiry. - (1) Such consent shall not be given unless the [appropriate Government]
be satisfied. [either on the report of the Collector under section 5A, sub-section (2), or] by an
enquiry held as hereinafter provided, [(a) that the purpose of the acquisition is to obtain land for the erection of dwelling houses for
workmen employed by the Company or for the provision of amenities directly connected
therewith, or
[(aa) that such acquisition is needed for the construction of some building or work for a
Company which is engaged or is taking steps for engaging itself in any industry or work which is
for a public purpose, or]
(b) that such acquisition is needed for the construction of some work, and that such work is likely
to prove useful to the public].
(2) Such enquiry shall be held by such officer and at such time and place as the [appropriate
Government] shall appoint.
(3) Such officer may summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses and compel the
production of documents by the same means and, as far as possible, in the same manner as is
provided by the [Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)] in the case of a Civil Court.
41. Agreement with appropriate Government. - If the [appropriate Government] is satisfied [after
considering the report, if any, of the Collector under section 5A, sub-section (2), or on the report
of the officer making an inquiry under section 40] that [the proposed acquisition is for any of the
purposes referred to in clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 40], it
shall require the Company to enter into an agreement [with the [appropriate Government]],
providing to the satisfaction of the [appropriate Government] for the following matters, namely :-

(1) the - [payment to the [appropriate Government]] of the cost of the acquisition;
(2) the transfer, on such payment, of the land to the Company.
(3) the terms on which the land shall be held by the Company,
[(4) where the acquisition is for the purpose of erecting dwelling houses or the provision of
amenities connected therewith, the time within which, the conditions on which and the manner in
which the dwelling houses or amenities shall be erected or provided;
[(4A) where the acquisition is for the construction of any building or work for a Company which
is engaged or is taking steps for engaging itself in any industry or work which is for a public
purpose, the time within which, and the conditions on which, the building or work shall be
constructed or executed; and]

(5) where the acquisition is for the construction of any other work, the time within which and the
conditions on which the work shall be executed and maintained and the terms on which the
public shall be entitled to use the work.]
42. Publication of agreement. - Every such agreement shall, as soon as may be after its
execution, be published in the official Gazette, and shall thereupon (so far as regards the terms
on which the public shall be entitled to use the work) have the same effect as if it had formed
part of this Act.
43. Section 39 to 42 not to apply where Government bound by agreement to provide land for
Companies. - The provisions of sections 39 to 42, both inclusive, shall not apply and the
corresponding sections of Land Acquisition Act, 1870 (10 of 1870), shall be deemed never to
have applied, to the acquisition of land for any Railway or other Company, for the purposes of
which, [under any agreement with such Company, the secretary of State for India in Council, the
Secretary of State, [the Central Government or any State Government] is or was bound to
provide land].
44. How agreement with Railway Company may be proved. - In the case of the acquisition of
land for the purpose of a Railway Company, the existence of such an agreement as is mentioned
in section 43 may be proved by the production of a printed copy thereof purporting to be printed
by order of Government.
[44A. Restriction on transfer, etc. - No Company for which any land is acquired under this Part
shall be entitled to transfer the said land or any part thereof by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or
otherwise except with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government.
44B. Land not to be acquired under this Part except for certain purpose for private companies
other than Government companies. - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no land
shall be acquired under this Part, except for the purpose mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 40, for a private company, which is not a Government company.
Explanation. - "Private company" and "Government company" shall have the meaning
respectively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).]

PART VIII

MISCELLANEOUS
45. Service of notices. - (1) Service of any notice under this Act shall be made by delivering or
tendering a copy thereof signed, in the case of a notice section 4, by the officer therein
mentioned, and, in the case of any notice, by or by order of the Collector or the Judge.
(2) Whenever it may be practicable, the service of the notice shall be made on the person therein
named.

(3) When such person cannot be found, the service may be made on any adult male member of
his family residing with him; and, if no such adult male member can be found, the notice may be
served by fixing the copy on the outer door of the house in which the person therein named
ordinarily dwells or carries on business, or by fixing a copy thereof in some conspicuous place in
the office of the officer aforesaid or of the Collector or in the court-house, and also in some
conspicuous part of the land to be acquired :
Provided that, if the Collector or Judge shall so direct, a notice may be sent by post, in a letter
addressed to the person named therein at his last known residence, address or place of business
and 6[registered under sections 28 and 29 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (6 of 1898), and
service of it may be proved by the production of the addressee's receipt.
46. Penalty for obstructing acquisition of land. - Whoever willfully obstructs any person in doing
any of the acts authorized by section 4 or section 8, or willfully fills up, destroys, damages or
displaces any trench or mark made under section 4, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be
liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding one month, or to fine not exceeding 1[five
hundred rupees], or to both.
47. Magistrate to enforce surrender. - If the Collector is opposed or impeded in taking possession
under this Act of any land, he shall, if a Magistrate, enforce the surrender of the land to himself,
and if not a Magistrate, he shall apply to a Magistrate or (within the towns of Calcutta, Madras
and Bombay) to the Commissioner of Police, and such Magistrate or Commissioner (as the case
may be) shall enforce the surrender of the land to the Collector.
48. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not
completed. - (1) Except in the case provided for in section 36, the Government shall be at liberty
to withdraw from the acquisition of any land of which possession has not been taken.
(2) Whenever the Government withdraws from any such acquisition, the Collector shall
determine the amount of compensation due for the damage suffered by the owner in consequence
of the notice or of any proceedings there under, and shall pay such amount to the person
interested, together with all costs reasonably incurred by him in the prosecution of the
proceedings under this Act relating to the said land.
(3) The provision of Part III of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, to the determination of the
compensation payable under this section.
49. Acquisition of part of house or building. - (1) The provisions of this Act shall not be put in
force for the purpose of acquiring a part only of any house, manufactory or other building, if the
owner desires that the whole of such house, manufactory or building shall be so acquired:
Provided also that, if any question shall arise as to whether any land proposed to be taken under
this Act does or does not form part of a house, manufactory or building within the meaning of
this section, the Collector shall refer the determination of such question to the Court and shall not
be take possession of such land until after the question has been determined.

In deciding on such a reference the Court shall have regard to the question whether the land
proposed to be taken, is reasonably require for the full and unimpaired use of the house,
manufactory or building.
(2) If, in the case of any claim under section 23, sub-section (1), thirdly, by a person interested,
on account of the severing of the land to be acquired from his other land, the [appropriate
Government] is of opinion that the claim is unreasonable or excessive, it may, at any time before
the Collector has made his award, order the acquisition of the whole of the land of which the
land first sought to be acquired forms a part.
(3) In the case last hereinbefore provided for, no fresh declaration or other proceedings under
sections 6 to 10, both inclusive, shall be necessary; but the Collector shall without delay furnish a
copy of the order of the [appropriate Government] to the person interested, and shall thereafter
proceed to make his award under section 11.
50. Acquisition of land at cost of a local authority of Company. - (1) Where the provisions of this
Act are put in force for the purpose of acquiring land at the cost of any fund controlled or
managed by a local authority or of any Company, the charges of and incidental to such
acquisition shall be defrayed from or by such fund or company.
(2) In any proceeding held before a Collector or Court in such cases the local authority or
Company concerned may appear and adduce evidence for the purpose of determining the amount
of compensation.
Provided that no such local authority or Company shall be entitled to demand a reference under
section 18.
51. Exemption from stamp duty and fees. - No award or agreement made under this Act shall be
chargeable with stamp duty, and no person claiming under any such award or agreement shall be
liable to pay any fee for a copy of the same.
[51A. Acceptance of certified copy as evidence. - In any proceeding under this Act, a certified
copy of a document registered under the Regulation Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), including a copy
given under section 57 of that Act, may be accepted as evidence of the transaction recorded in
such document].
52. Notice in case of suits for anything done in pursuance of Act. - No suit or other proceeding
shall be commenced or prosecuted against any person for anything done in pursuance of this Act,
without giving to such person a month's previous notice in writing of the intended proceeding,
and of the cause thereof, nor after tender of sufficient amends.
53. Code of Civil Procedure to apply to proceedings before Court - Save in so far as they may be
inconsistent with anything contained in this Act, the provisions of the [Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908)], shall apply to all proceedings before the Court under this Act.

[54. Appeals in proceedings before Court. - Subject to the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), applicable to appeals from original decrees, and notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in any enactment for the time being in force, an appeal shall only lie in
any proceedings under this Act to the High Court from the award, or from any part of the award,
of the Court and from any decree of the High Court passed on such appeal as aforesaid an appeal
shall lie to 4[the Supreme Court] subject to the provisions contained in section 110 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in Order XLV thereof.]
55. Power to make rules. - (1) The [appropriate Government] shall have power to make rules
consistent with this Act for the guidance of officers in all matters connected with its
enforcement, and may from time to time alter and add to the rules so made:
[Provided that the power to make rules for carrying out the purposes of Part VII of this Act shall
be exercisable by the Central Government and such rules may be made for the guidance of the
State Governments and the officers of the Central Government and of the State Governments:
Provided further that every such rule made by the Central Government shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of parliament while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if,
[before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule :]
[Provided also that every such rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.]
(2) The power to make, alter and add to rules under sub-section (1) shall be subject to the
conditions of the rules, being made, altered or added to after previous publication.
(3) All such rules, alterations and additions shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall
thereupon have the force of law.

ANNEXURE
Exact from the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, (1962)
(31 of 1962)
7. Validation of certain actuations.Notwithstanding any judgment ,decree per order of any court, every actuation
of land for a company made or purporting to have been made under part VII of the principle Act before the 20th day
of July 1962 , shall,in so far as such acquisition is not for any of the purposes mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 40 of the principal Act, be deemed to have been made for the purpose mentioned in
clause (aa) of the said sub-section, and accordingly every such acquisition and any proceeding, order, agreement or
action in connection with such acquisition shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, as valid as if the

provisions of section 40 and 41 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, were in force at all material times when
such acquisition was made or proceeding was held or order was made or agreement was entered into or action was
taken.
Explanation - In this section "Company" has the same meaning as in clause (e) of section 3 of the principal Act as
amended by this Act.
***********
The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 - Extract of Section 30 - Transitional provisions.
30(1) The provisions of sub-section (1A) of section 23 of the principal Act, as inserted by Clause (a) of section 15 of
this Act, shall apply, and shall be deemed to have applied, also to and in relation to(a) every proceeding for the acquisition of any land under the principal Act pending on the 30th day of April, 1982
(the date of introduction of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill in the House of people) in which no award has
been made by the Collector before that date;
(b) every proceeding for the acquisition of any land under the principal Act commenced after that date, whether or
not an award has been made by the Collector before the commencement of this Act.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 23 and section 28 of the principal Act, as amended by clause (b) of
section 15 and section 18 of this Act respectively, shall apply, and shall be deemed to have applied, also to, and
relation to, any award made by the Collector or Court or to any order passed, by the High Court or Supreme Court in
appeal against any such award under the provisions of the principal Act after the 30th day of April 1982 (the date of
introduction of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill 1982, in the House of the People and before the
commencement of this Act.
(3) The provisions of section 34 of the principal Act, as amended by section 20 of this Act, shall apply, and shall
be deemed to have applied, also to, and in relation to,
(a) every case in which possession of any land acquired under the principal Act had been taken before the 30th of
April, 1982 (the date of introduction of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill 1982, in the House of the People ),
and the amount of compensation for such acquisition had not been paid or deposited under section 31 of the
principal Act until such date, with effect on and from that date; and
(b) every case in which such possession had been taken on or after that date but before the commencement of this
Act without the amount of compensation having been paid or deposited under the said section 31 with effect on and
from the date of taking such possession.

Central Government Act
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1. Short title, application and extent.—
(1) These rules may be called the Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956.
(2) These rules apply in respect of the payment of wages to persons employed, either by the
owner or by a contractor engaged by the owner, in any mine to which the Mines Act, 1952
(XXXV of 1952), applies 2[or in any oil field].
(3) They extend to the whole of India 3[***].
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[1A. The provisions of these rules shall apply in relation to oil fields as they apply in relation to
mines.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Act” means the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (IV of 1936); 1[(aa) “agent” means an agent as
defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);]
(b) “authority” means an authority appointed under sub-section (1) of section 15;
(c) “contractor” means a person engaged under a contract, by the owner of the mine for work on
the mine and includes a sub-contractor;
(d) “Court” means the Court mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 17;
(e) “deduction for breach of contract” means a deduction made in accordance with the provisions
of the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 9;
(f) “deduction for damage or loss” means a deduction made in accordance with the provisions of
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 7; 2[(ff) “Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central)”
means an officer appointed as such by the Central Government;] 3[(g) “employer” means the
owner of the mine and includes a contractor, an agent, or manager or any other person
responsible under section 3 of the Act for payment of wages and includes in the case of a
deceased employer, his legal representative;]
(h) “Form” means a Form appended to these rules;
(i) “Inspector” means an Inspector referred to in section 14; 4[(ii) “manager” means the person
appointed under section 17 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), to discharge the functions of a
manager;]
(j) “mine” means a mine as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (XXXV of
1952); 4[(jj) “oil field” means an oil field as defined in clause (e) of section 3 of the Oil Fields
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (53 of 1948);
(jjj) “owner” means the owner as defined in clause (1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of
1952);] 3[(k) “person employed” or “employed person” means a person employed in a mine or
an oil field to whom the Act applies and includes, in the case of a deceased employed person, his
legal representative;] 5[(kk) “Regional Labour Commissioner 6[(Central)]” means an officer
appointed as such by the Central Government;]
(l) “section” means a section of the Act; and
(m) words and expressions used in these rules and not defined but defined in the Act shall have
the same meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[2A. Notice of opening, abandonment, discontinuance, reopening and change in the ownership
and addresses, etc.—

(1) When a mine has been opened, the owner, agent or manager shall forthwith communicate the
actual date of opening to the Regional Labour Commissioner 2[(Central)] in Form A.
(2) When it is intended to abandon a mine or seam or to discontinue working thereof for a period
exceeding 60 days, the owner, agent or manager shall not, less than 40 days before such
abandonment or discontinuance, give to the Regional Labour Commissioner 2[(Central)] a notice
stating the reasons for the proposed abandonment or discontinuance and the number of persons
likely to be affected thereby: Provided that when on account of unforeseen circumstances a mine
is abandoned or discontinued before the said notice has been given or when without previous
intimation the discontinuance extends beyond a period of 60 days, the notice shall be given
forthwith.
(3) When a mine or seam has been abandoned or the working thereof has been discontinued over
a period exceeding 60 days, the owner, agent or manager shall within seven days of the
abandonment or the expiry of the said period, give to the Regional Labour Commissioner
3[(Central)], notice in Form A.
(4) When it is intended to re-open a mine or seam after abandonment or after discontinuance for
a period exceeding 60 days, the owner, agent or manager shall, not less than 30 days before
resumption of mining operations, give to the Regional Labour Commissioner 3[(Central)], notice
in Form A.
(5) When a mine has been re-opened, the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall forthwith
communicate the actual date of re-opening to the Regional Labour Commissioner 3[(Central)].
(6) When a change occurs in the name or ownership of a mine or in the address of the owner, the
owner, agent or manager shall, within seven days from the date of change, give to the Regional
Labour Commissioner 3[(Central)], a notice in Form A: Provided that where the owner of a mine
is a firm or other association of individuals, a change,—
(i) of any partner in the case of a firm;
(ii) of any member, in the case of an association;
(iii) of any director, in the case of a public company; or
(iv) of any shareholder, in the case of a private company; shall be also intimated to the Regional
Labour Commissioner 3[Central)], within seven days from the date of the change.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
3. Register of fines.—
(1) Every employer who has obtained approval under sub-section (1) of section 8 to a list of acts
and omissions in respect of which fines may be imposed, shall maintain a Register of Fines in
Form I.
(2) The list of acts and omissions in respect of which fine may be imposed, shall be entered in
the Register of Fines, at the beginning.
(3) At the beginning of the Register of Fines, there shall also be entered, serially numbered, the
approved purpose or purposes on which the amount of the fines realised is to be expended.
(4) At the end of every month, the amounts realised as fines shall be totalled and carried forward,
after deduction of disbursement, if any, as per Part II of Form I.
(5) When any disbursements are made from the amounts of the fines realised a deduct entry of
the amount so expended shall be made in the Register of Fines, and a voucher or receipt in
respect of the amount shall be affixed to the register. If more than one purpose has been
approved, the entry of the disbursement shall also indicate the purpose for which it is made. 1[(6)
The Register of Fines shall be kept at the work spot 2[or where the employer experiences
difficulty in keeping it at the work spot, at other suitable place approved by the 3[Regional

Labour Commissioner (Central)] in this behalf] and maintained up-to-date. Where no fine has
been imposed on any employee in a wage-period, a ‘nil’ entry shall be made across the body of
the register at the end of the wage-period indicating also in precise terms the wage-period to
which the ‘nil’ entry relates.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
4. Register of deductions for damage or loss.—The register of deductions for damage or loss
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 10 shall be in Form II 1[and shall be kept at the work
spot 2[or, where the employer experiences difficulty in keeping it at the work spot, at other
suitable place approved by the 3[Regional Labour Commissioner (Central)] in this behalf] and
maintained up-to-date. Where no deduction has been made from the wages of any employee in a
wage-period, a ‘nil’ entry shall be made across the body of the register at the end of the wageperiod, indicating also in precise terms the wage-period to which the ‘nil’ entry relates.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
5. Register of Wages.—A Register of Wages in Form III shall be maintained 1[up-to-date] and
kept at the work-spot, 2[or, where the employer experiences difficulty in keeping it at the workspot, at other suitable place approved by the 3[Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) in this
behalf] by every employer in proof of payment of wages. The rates of wages for all classes of
workers shall be entered at the beginning of the Register.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[5A. The register required to be maintained under the Mines Rules, 1955 in Form B in the First
Schedule to those rules shall be deemed to be required to be maintained under these rules also.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[5B. Combined form of registers.—2[Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, where
mechanised pay rolls are introduced for better administration or a combined (alternative) form is
sought to be used by the employer to avoid duplication of work for compliance with the
provisions of any other Act or the rules framed thereunder, an alternative suitable form in lieu of
any of the forms prescribed under these rules, may be used with the previous approval of the
Central Government.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[6. Preservation and maintenance of registers.—
(1) Every register maintained under the Act or these rules shall be preserved for a period of three
years after the date of the last entry made therein 2[at the workspot or where the employer
experiences difficulty in keeping them at the work spot, at other suitable place approved by the
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central)] in this behalf].
(2) The registers maintained under the Act or these rules shall be maintained in English and in
Hindi, or in the language understood by the majority of the persons employed in the mine:
Provided that where a register is maintained in Hindi or any other language a true translation
thereof in English shall also be maintained.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[6A. Production of registers and other records.—All registers and records required to be
maintained by the employer under these rules shall on demand be produced before the Inspector:
Provided that where an establishment has been closed, the Inspector may demand the production
of the registers and records in his office or such other public place as may be nearer to the
employer.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956

7. Places for displaying notices.—The Inspector shall specify such place of places in the mine as
he thinks fit (hereinafter referred to as the “specified place or places”) for the display of notices,
lists and rules under rules 8, 12 and 16.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
8. Notices of dates of payment.—
(1) The employer shall display in a conspicuous place outside the office of the mine and at the
specified place or places, notices in English and Hindi or in the language, if that not be Hindi, of
the majority of the persons employed at such place or places showing,— 1[(i) the wages period
for which the wages are payable;] 2[(ii)] for not less than two weeks in advance, the days on
which wages are to be paid; and 2[(iii)] the rates of wages and scales of allowances payable to
persons employed in the mines concerned in Form IV; 1[and] 1[(iv) the day or days on which
unpaid wages are to be paid, indicating the relevant wage period.]
(2) Copies of all such notices and alterations therein shall be sent to the Inspector.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[8A. Supervision of payment.—Whenever so directed by the Inspector, the employer or his
representative at the workspot shall pay wages to the employed persons on the notified date of
payment under the supervision of the Inspector.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
9. Prescribed authority.—The 1[Regional Labour Commissioner] 2[(Central)] shall be the
prescribed authority competent to approve, under sub-section
(1) of section 8, acts and omissions in respect of which fines may be imposed and under subsection (8) of section 8, the purposes to which the fines realised may be applied.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
10. Application in respect of fines.—Every employer desiring to have the power to impose fines
in respect of any acts and omissions on the part of employed persons shall send to the 1[Regional
Labour Commissioner] 2[(Central)]—
(a) a list, in English in duplicate, clearly defining such acts and omissions;
(b) in cases where the employer himself does not intend to be the sole authority empowered to
impose fines, a list, in duplicate, showing by virtue of office or otherwise, such members of his
staff as may pass orders imposing fines and the class of establishment on which any such
member may impose a fine.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
11. Approval of list of acts and omissions.—The 1[Regional Labour Commissioner] 2[(Central)]
may, on receipt of the list referred to in clause
(a) of rule 10, and after such inquiry as he considers necessary, pass orders in respect of the said
list either—
(a) disapproving the list, or
(b) approving the list in its original form or as amended by him, in which case such list shall be
deemed to have been approved under sub-section (1) of section 8: Provided that no order
disapproving or amending the list shall be passed unless the employer shall have been given an
opportunity of showing cause in writing against such order.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
12. Posting of the list.—
(1) The employer shall also display outside the office of the mine and at the specified place or
places, notice showing the name and complete address of the Inspector who exercises
jurisdiction under the Act over that mine.

(2) The employer shall display outside the office of the mine and at the specified place or places,
a copy in English, together with a literal translation thereof, in the language of the majority of the
persons employed at such mine or place, of the list approved under rule 11.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
13. Persons authorised to impose fines.—
(1) No fine may be imposed upon a person employed in a mine by any person other than the
employer or by a person included in the list referred to in clause (b) of rule 10.
(2) In the case of persons employed by a contractor, no fine may be imposed by any person other
than the contractor: Provided that a contractor who runs more than one establishment in two or
more localities, and who employs not less than fifty persons in one locality, may, with the
approval of the 1[Regional Labour Commissioner] 2[(Central)], delegate his power to fine to his
representative in that locality.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
14. Procedure in imposing fines and deductions.—
(1) No fines shall be imposed on and no deductions shall be made from the wages of any person
employed in a mine except in accordance with the procedure laid down in the rules and
regulations or certified Standing Orders in force in the mine, and no fine shall be imposed or
deduction made from the wages until the employed person has been given an opportunity in
writing of showing cause against such imposition or deduction.
(2) No fine shall be imposed on and no deduction for damage or loss shall be made for, the
wages of a person employed by a contractor until the person authorised to impose the fine or
make the deduction has explained personally to the said person the act or omission, or damage or
loss in respect of which the fine or deduction is proposed to be imposed or made and the amount
of fine and deduction, which it is proposed to impose or make and has heard his explanation in
the presence of at least one other employed person.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
15. Information to the employer.—The person imposing a fine or directing the making of a
deduction for damage or loss shall (unless such person is the employer) at once inform the
employer of all particulars necessary for the completion of the register prescribed by rule 3 or
rule 4, as the case may be.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
16. Deductions under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 9.—
(1) No deduction under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 9 shall be made from the wages
of an employed person who is under the age of fifteen years or is a woman.
(2) No such deduction shall be made from the wages of any employed person unless—
(a) there is a provision in writing in the terms of the contract of employment or in the certified
Standing Orders of the employer requiring him to give notice of the termination of his
employment;
(b) this rule has been displayed in English and in the language of the majority of the employed
persons outside the office of the mine, and at the specified place or places concerned, and has
been so displayed for not less than one month before the commencement of the absence in
respect of which the deduction is made; and
(c) at least one week before such deduction is made, a notice has been displayed outside the
office of the mine and at the specified place or places concerned, giving the names of the persons
from whom deduction is proposed to be made, the number of days, wages to be deducted and the
condition, if any, on which the deduction will be remitted: Provided that where the deduction is

proposed to be made from all the persons employed in any department or section of the mine, it
shall be sufficient, in lieu of giving the names of such persons in the department or section of the
mine, to specify the department or section affected.
(3) No such deduction shall exceed the wages of the person employed for the period by which
the notice of termination of service given falls short of the period of such notice required by the
contract of employment or certified Standing Orders.
(4) If any conditions have been specified in the notice displayed under clause (c) of sub-rule (2),
no such deduction shall be made from any person who has complied with such conditions.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
17. Measurement of the amount of work done by piece workers.—
(1) In the case of piece rated work, the employer shall be responsible for arranging, at the end of
each day or shift or such longer period not exceeding the wage-period as may be found
convenient, for the weighment, measurement or assessment or work done by the workers
concerned in their presence or in the presence of their gangman (mistry), if any, and for the
recording immediately thereafter of the particulars in register maintained in Form IVA. At the
close of the wage-period, the total weighment, measurement or assessment in respect of each
worker shall be recorded in a slip and issued to the worker at least a day prior to the
disbursement of wages. In case of any dispute regarding weighment, measurement or
assessment, the employer shall, as far as possible, have the dispute settled, on the spot in
consultation with the worker or his gangman, if any: 1[Provided that where the 2[Deputy Chief
Labour Commissioner (Central)] is satisfied that the register or records maintained by an
employer will serve the purpose, he may permit such employer to continue to maintain such
register or records in lieu of the register required to be maintained in Form IVA.] 3[(1A) The
Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) may exempt, from the provisions of sub-rule (1), any
mine which has provided weigh-bridge or any other mechanical device for the weighment of the
work done by the workers subject to the condition that such weigh-bridge or mechanical device
shall be tested and certified by the Inspector or by such other agency and at such intervals as may
be specified by the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central).]
(2) All weights, measures and weighing machines which are used for checking or ascertaining
the wages of employed persons shall be made available for examination to the Inspector, who
may in the event of his not being satisfied with the correctness of the apparatus or the weights,
seal and prohibit their future use and report the matter immediately for necessary action to the
appropriate authority responsible for the administration of the Standards of Weights and
Measures Act, 1956 (89 of 1956).
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[18. Annual Return.—Every employer shall send a return in Form V so as to reach the Regional
Labour Commissioner 2[(Central)] not later than the 1st of February following the end of the
year to which it relates endorsing simultaneously a copy thereof to the Inspector having
jurisdiction under the Act over the mine.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
19. Advances to person employed by an employer.—
(1) An advance of wages not already earned shall not ordinarily exceed the amount equal to two
calendar months’ wages of the employed person. In exceptional circumstances, the amount of
such advance may, with the previous sanction of the 1[Regional Labour Commissioner]
2[(Central)], be made to the extent of four calendar months’ wages.

(2) The advance may be recovered in instalments by a deduction from the wages spread over not
more than twelve months in the case of an ordinary advance and twenty-four months in the case
of an advance granted in exceptional circumstances. In no case shall the amount of an instalment
exceed one-fourth of the wages earned in a wage-period.
(3) The amount of all advances sanctioned and repayments thereof shall be entered in a register
in Form VI which shall be maintained in English and in the language spoken by the majority of
workers.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
20. Procedure, costs and court-fees.—The procedure to be followed by the authorities appointed
under sub-section
(1) of section 15 and the Courts mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 17, the scales of costs
which may be allowed in, and the amount of court-fees payable in respect of proceedings under
the Act to which these rules apply shall be such procedure, scales and amounts as are, from time
to time, prescribed by the State Government in the exercise of its powers under the Act in that
behalf for the authority or Court concerned.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
21. Abstracts.—The abstracts of the Act and of the rules made thereunder to be displayed under
section 25 shall be in Form VII.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
1[22. Penalties.—Whoever, being required under these rules to maintain any register or records
or to furnish an information or return fails to maintain such register or record or to furnish such
information or return or fails to observe provisions of any of these rules shall, for each such
offence, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees: Provided that an
employer who maintains the required register or record or furnishes the required return without
making up-to-date entries therein, or fails to display notices shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to two hundred rupees: 2[Provided further that no penalty shall be imposed on any
person under this rule without giving him a reasonable opportunity, of being heard.]
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956
23. Rescission and savings.—The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1949, are hereby rescinded
but all acts done and orders issued under the rules so rescinded shall so far as they are not
inconsistent with these rules, be deemed to have been respectively done and issued under these
rules.
The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956 Form VII (See rule 21) Abstract of the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936 and the rules made thereunder Whom the Act affects 1. The Act applies to the
payment of wages to persons in mines receiving less than Rs. 1600 a month. 2. No employed
person can give up by contract or agreement, his rights under the Act. Definition of wages 3.
‘Wages’ means all remuneration (whether by way of salary, allowances or otherwise) expressed
in terms of money or capable of being so expressed which, would, if the terms of employment,
express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in respect of his employment
or of work done in such employment, and includes— (a) any remuneration payable under any
award or settlement between the parties or order of a Court; (b) any remuneration to which the
person employed is entitled in respect of overtime work or holidays or any leave period; (c) any
additional remuneration payable under the terms of employment (whether called a bonus or by
any other name); (d) any sum which by reason of the termination of employment of the person
employed is payable under any law, contract or instrument which provides for the payment of

such sum, whether with or without deductions but does not provide for the time within which the
payment is to be made; (e) any sum to which the person employed is entitled under any scheme
framed under any law for the time being in force. but does not include— (1) any bonus (whether
under a scheme of profit sharing or otherwise) which does not form part of the remuneration
payable under the terms of employment or which is not payable under any award or settlement
between the parties or order of a Court; (2) the value of any house-accommodation, or of the
supply of light, water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any service excluded from the
computation of wages by a special or general order of the State Government; (3) any
contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the interest which may
have accrued thereon; (4) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concessions; (5)
any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed on him by the nature of
his employment; or (6) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment in cases other
than those specified in sub-clause (d). Responsibility for and method of payment 4. The
employer is responsible for the payment under the Act of wages to persons employed under him,
and any contractor employing persons is responsible for payment to the persons he employs. 5.
Wage-periods shall be fixed for the payment of wages at intervals not exceeding one month. 6.
Wages shall be paid on a working day within 7 days of the end of the wage-period (or within ten
days if 1,000 or more persons are employed). The wages of a person discharged shall be paid not
later than the second working day after his discharge. 7. Payment in kind is prohibited. Fines and
Deductions 8. No deductions shall be made from wages except those authorised under the Act
(See paragraphs 9-15 below). 1[9. (1) Fines can be imposed only for such acts and omissions as
the employer may, with the previous approval of the Inspector, specify by a notice displayed at
or near the main entrance of the work-place or places at the mine and after giving the employed
person an opportunity for explanation. (2) Fines,— (a) shall not exceed three paise in the rupee;
(b) shall not be recovered by instalments, or later that sixty days of the date of imposition; (c)
shall be recorded in a register and applied to such purposes beneficial to the employed persons as
are approved by the Inspector; and (d) shall not be imposed on any employed person who is
under the age of fifteen years.] 10. (a) Deductions for absence from duty can be made only or
account of the absence of the employed person at times when he should be working and such
deductions must not exceed an amount which is in the same proportion to his wages for the
wage-period as the time he was absent in that period is to the total time he should have been at
work. (b) If ten or more employed persons, acting in concert, absent themselves without
reasonable cause and without due notice, the deduction for absence can include wages for eight
days in lieu of notice, but— (1) No deduction for breaking contract can be made from a person
under 15 or a woman; (2) There must be a provision in writing which forms part of the contract
of employment or the certified Standing Orders, requiring that a specific period of notice of
intention to cease work not exceeding 15 days or the period of notice which the employer has to
give to discharge a worker, must be given to the employer and that wages may be deducted in
lieu of such notice; (3) The above provision must be displayed at or near the main entrance of the
work place or places at the mine or work place; (4) No deduction of this nature can be made until

a week’s notice that this deduction is to be made has been posted at or near the main entrance of
the work place or places at the mine or work place; (5) No deduction must exceed the wages of
the employed person for the period by which the notice he gives of leaving employment, is less
than the notice he should have given under his contract. 11. Deductions can be made for damage
to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to an employed person or for loss of money for which he
is required to account, where such damage or loss is due to his neglect or default. Such
deductions cannot exceed the amount of the damage or loss caused and can be made only after
giving the employed persons an opportunity for explanation. 12. Deductions can be made,
equivalent to the value thereof for house accommodation supplied by the employer or by the
Government or any housing board set up under any law for the time being in force (whether the
Government or the board is employer or not) or any other authority engaged in the business of
subsidizing house accommodation which may be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government, amenities and services (other than tools and raw materials) supplied by the
employer: provided these are accepted by the employed person as a part of the terms of his
employment and have in the case of amenities and services been authorised by order of the
Central Government. 13. (a) Deductions can be made for the recovery of advances or for
adjustment of over-payment of wages. (b) Advances made before the employment began can
only be recovered from the first payment of wages for a complete wage period but no recovery
can be made of advances given for travelling expenses before employment began. (c) Advances
of unearned wages can be made at the employer’s discretion during the employment. 14.
Deductions can be made for subscription to and for repayment of advances from any recognised
provident fund. 15. Deductions can be made for payments to co-operative societies approved by
the Central Government or to the postal insurance, subject to any conditions imposed by the
Central Government. Deductions can also be made with the written authorisation of the person
employed for payment of any premium on his life insurance policy to the Life Insurance
Corporation of India or for the purchase of securities of the Government of India or of any State
Government or for being deposited in any Post Office Savings Bank in furtherance of any
savings scheme of any such Government. 15A. Any loss of wages resulting from withholding of
increment or promotion, reduction to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stage in the time
scale or suspension does not constitute deduction from wages within the meaning of the Act. For
this purpose the rules framed by an employer in relation to his employees in mines for the
purpose of any of the aforesaid penalties shall provide that:— (i) any such penalty as aforesaid,
except the penalty of suspension, shall not be imposed unless the person concerned,— (a) has
been informed of the charges in respect of which it is proposed to impose the penalty; (b) has
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why the proposed penalty should not be
imposed. (ii) the person concerned is given a right of appeal against any order imposing the
penalty. Inspections 16. An Inspector can enter on any premises and can exercise the powers of
inspection (including examination of documents and taking of evidence) as he may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Act. Complaints of Deductions or Delays 17. (1)
Where irregular deductions are made from wages, or delays in payment take place, an employed

person can make an application in the prescribed form within 6 months to the Authority
appointed by the State Government for the purpose. An application delayed beyond this period
may be rejected unless sufficient cause for the delay is shown. (2) Any legal practitioner, official
of a registered trade union, Inspector under the Act or other person acting with the authority can
make the complaint on behalf of an employed person. (3) A single application may be presented
by or on behalf of any number of persons belonging to the same mine the payment of whose
wages has been delayed. Action by the Authority 18. The Authority may award compensation to
the employed person in addition to ordering the payment of delayed wages or the refund of
illegal deductions. If a malicious or vexatious complaint is made, the Authority may impose a
penalty not exceeding Rs. 50 on the applicant and order that it be paid to the employer. Appeal
against the Authority 19. An appeal against an order dismissing either wholly or in part an
application or against a direction may be preferred within thirty days in Calcutta to the Chief
Judge, Court of Small Causes and elsewhere to the District Court,— (a) by the employer if the
total amount directed to be paid exceeds Rs. 300; (b) by an employed person or any official of a
registered trade union authorised in writing to act on his behalf, if the total amount of wages
withheld from him or his co-workers, exceeds rupees fifty; (c) by a person directed to pay a
penalty for a malicious or vexatious application. Punishments for breaches of the Act 20. Any
one tried for delaying the payment of wages beyond the due date, or making any unauthorised
deductions from wages is liable to a fine upto Rs. 500, but only if prosecuted with the sanction of
the Authority of the Appellate Court. 21. The employer who,— (1) does not fix a wage-period,
or (2) makes payment in kind, or (3) fails to display at or near the main entrance of the work
place or places at the mine or work place this abstract in English and in the language of the
majority of the employed persons, or (4) breaks certain rules made under this Act, is liable to
fine not exceeding Rs. 200. A complaint to this effect can be made only by the Inspector, or with
his sanction. The Payment of Wages (Mines) Rules, 1956 1[Form A (See rule 2A) Notice of
opening, abandonment, discontinuance, re-opening and change in the ownership, address, etc.
From ................................... ................................... To The Regional Labour Commissioner
(Central), ................................................................................ Sir, I have to furnish the following
particulars in respect of* ......................... at................... mine of...................... (owner). 1. In the
case of change of name of mine: Old name of mine Date of change 2. (a) Situation of the mine:
Village Police Station Sub-division (Taluk) District State (b) In the case of new mine, particulars
of situation of mine: Post Office Telegraph Office Railway Station Rest House (Give distance
therefrom) Means of travelling 3. (a) Name and Postal address of Present/Previous** (i) Owner
(ii) Managing Agent, if any (iii) Agent, if any (iv) Manager (v) In case of change, date of change
4. Date on which it is intended to open/reopen/abandon/ discontinue*** the mine. 5. Actual date
of opening/reopening/abandonment/discontinuance*** of the mine. 6. 2[No. of persons
affected.] Yours faithfully, Signature Designation: Owner/ Agent/Manager
Date............................. Instructions * Mention the matter to which the notice refers. ** To be
filled in only when the notice refers to a change, and only against the item in respect of which

notice is given. *** Delete whatever is not applicable. ————— 1. Ins. by S.O. 794, dated
24th February, 1964. 2. Ins. by S.O. 3844, dated 18th November, 1970.

THE MINES ACT, 1952
(Act No. 35 of 1952 )
(15 March, 1952)
(As modified upto 1983)
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the Regulation of labour and safety in mines
Be it enacted by Parliament as follows :CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.

2.

Short title, extent and commencement –
(1)This Act may be called the Mines Act, 1952.
(2)It extends to whole of India
(3)It shall come into force on sub date or dates as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for
st
different provisions of this Act and for different states but not later than 31 December,
1953.
Definitions : - (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires :
(a) omitted
(b) “adult” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year.
(c) “agent”, when used in relation to a mine, means every person, whether appointed as
such or not, who, acting or purporting to act on behalf of the owner, takes part in the
management, control, supervision or direction of the mine or of any part thereof:
(d) “Chief Inspector” means the Chief Inspector of Mines appointed under this Act;
(e) “Committee” means a committee constituted under section 12:
(f) “day” means a period of twenty-four hours beginning at mid-night;
(g) “district magistrate” means, in a presidency-town, the person appointed by the Central
Government to perform the duties of a district magistrate under this Act in that town;
(h) a person is said to be “employed” in a mine who works as the manager or who works
under appointment by the owner, agent or manager of the mine or with knowledge of the
manager, whether for wages or not.
(i) in any mining operation (including the concomitant operations of handing and transport
of minerals up to the point of despatch and of gathering sand and transport thereof to the
mine)
(ii) in operations or services relating to the development of the mine including
construction of plant therein but excluding construction of buildings, roads, wells and any
building work not directly connected with any existing or future mining operations:
(iii) in operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing any part or any machinery used in or
about the mine;
(iv) in operations, within the premises of the mine of loading for despatch of minerals;
(v) in any office of the mine:
(vi) in any welfare, health, sanitary or conservancy services required to be provided under
this Act, or watch and ward, within the premises of the mine excluding residential area;
or
(vii) in any kind of work whatsoever which is preparatory or incidental to, or connected
with mining operations;
(i) “Inspector” means an Inspector of Mines appointed under this Act, and includes a
district magistrate when exercising any power or performing any duty of an Inspector
which is empowered by this Act to exercise or perform;
(i) “mine” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of searching for or
obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on and includes (i) all borings, bore holes, oil wells and accessory crude conditioning plants, including the
pipe conveying mineral oil within the oilfields:
(ii) all shafts, in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, where in the course of being sunk
or not:
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven;
(iv) all opencast workings;

(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the bringing into or removal from a mine
of minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom;
(vi)all adits, livels, planes, machinery works, railways, tramways and sidings in or
adjacent to and belonging to a mine;
(vii) all protective works being carried out in or adjacent to a mine;
(viii) all workshop and store situated within the precincts of a mine and the same
management and used primarily for the purposes connected with that mine or a number
of mines under the same management;
(ix) all power stations, transformer sub-stations converter stations : rectifier stations and
accumulator storage stations for supplying electricity solely or mainly for the purpose of
working the mine or a number of mines under the same management;
(x) any premises for the time being used for depositing sand or other material for use in
a mine or for depositing refuse from a mine or in which any operations in connection with
such and refuse or other material is being carried on, being premises exclusively
occupied by the owner of the mine:
(xi) any premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine or which any process ancillary
to the getting, dressing or operation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried on;
(jj) “minerals” means all substances which can be obtained from the earth by mining,
digging, drilling, dredging, hydraulicing, quarrying, or by any other operation and includes
mineral oils (which in turn include natural gas and petroleum):
(jjj)
(k) “office of the mine” means any office at the surface of the mine concerned;
(kk) “Open cast working” means a quarry, that is to say an excavation where any
operation for the purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being
carried on, not being a shaft or an excavation which extends below superjacent ground.
(i) “owner” when used, in relation to a mine, means any person who is the immediate
proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part thereof and in the case of a
mine the business whereof is being carried on by liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or
receiver but does not include a person who merely receives a royalty rent or fine from the
mine, subject to any lease grant or licence for the working thereof, or is merely the owner
of the soil and not interested in the minerals of the mine; but (any contractor or sublessee for the working of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to this Act in like
manner as if he were an owner, but not so as to exempt the owner from any liability;
(m) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules, regulation or byelaws, as the case may ;
(n) “qualified medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who possesses any
recognised medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1959 and who is enrolled on a state medical register as defined in
clause (k) of that section:)
(o) “regulations” “rules” and “bye-laws” means respectively regulations, rules and byelaws made under this Act;
(p) where work of the same kind is carried out by two or more sets of persons working
during different periods of the day each of such sets is called a “relay” (and each of such
periods is called a “shift”,)
(pp)”reportable injury” means any injury other than a serious bodily injury which involves,
or in all probability will involve, the enforced absence of the injured persons from work for
a period of seventy-two hours or more.
(q) “serious bodily injury” means any injury which involves; or in probability will involve
the permanent loss of any part or section of a body or the use of any part or section of a
body, or the permanent loss of or injury to the sight or hearing or any permanent
physical incapacity or the fracture of any bone or one or more joints or bones of any
phalanges of hand or foot.
(r) “week” means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such
other night as may be approved in writing for a particular area by the Chief Inspector or
an Inspector.
(2) A person working or employed or employed in or in connection with a mine is said to
be working or employed –
(a) “below ground” if he is working or employed –
(i)
in a shaft which has been or is in the course of being sunk; or
(ii)
in any excavation which extends below superjacent ground; and

(b) “above ground” if he is working in open cast working or any other manner not
specified in clause (a)
3. (1) Act not apply in certain cases – The provisions of this Act, except those contained
in
sections 7,8,9, 40,45 and 46 shall not apply to –
(b) any mine or part thereof in which excavation is being made for prospecting purposes
only and not for the purpose of obtaining minerals for use or sale :
Provided that –
(i)not more than twenty persons are employed on any one day in connection with
any such excavation.
(ii)the depth of the excavation measured from its highest to its lowest point
nowhere exceeds six, metres or, in the case of an excavation for coal fifteen
metres: and
(iii) no part of such excavation extends below superjacent ground; or
(b) any mine engaged in the extraction of kankar, murrum laterite, boulder,
gravel, shingle, ordinary sand (excluding moulding sand, glass sand and other
mineral sands), ordinary clay (excluding kaolin, china clay, white clay or fire clay),
building stone, slate, road metal, earthy fullers earth, marl chalk and lime stone.
Provided that –
(i) the working do not extend below superjacent ground: or
(ii)where it is an open cast working –
(a)the depth of the excavation measured from its highest to its lowest
point nowhere exceeds six metres;
(b)the number of persons employed on any one day does not exceed
fifty; and
(c)explosives are not used in connection with the excavation.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) the Central Government may, if
it is satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances obtaining in relation to mine or part
thereof or ground or class of mines, it is necessary or desirable so to do by notification in
the official Gazette, declare that any of the provisions of this Act, not set out in subsection (10, shall apply to any such mine or part thereof or group of class of mines or any
class of persons employed therein.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), if at any time any of
the conditions specified in the provision to clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) is
not fulfilled in relation to any mine referred to in that sub-section the provisions of this Act
not get out in sub-section (1), shall become immediately applicable, and it shall be the
duty of the owner, agent or manager of the mine to inform the prescribed authority in the
prescribed manner and within the prescribed time about the non-fulfilment.
(4) Reference to time of day – In this Act, reference to time of day are reference to Indian
standard time, being five and a half hours ahead of Green which mean time:
Provided that, for any area in Indian standard time is not ordinarily observed, the Central
Government may make rules –
(a) specifying the area;
(b) defining the local mean time ordinarily observed therein; and
(c) permitting such time to be observed in all or any of the mines situated in the area.
------

CHAPTER - II
INSPECTORS AND CERTIFYING SURGEONS
5.

(1) Chief Inspector and Inspector - The Central Government may, by notification in the
official Gazette, appoint such a person as possesses the prescribed qualifications to be
Chief Inspector of mines for all the territories to which this Act extends and such persons
as possess the prescribed qualifications to be Inspectors of Mines subordinate to the
Chief Inspector.
(2) No person shall be appointed to be Chief Inspector or an Inspector, or having been
appointed shall continue to hold such office, who is or becomes directly or indirectly
interested in any mine or mining rights in India.
(3) The District Magistrate may exercise the powers and perform the duties of an
Inspector subject to the general or special orders of the Central Government:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to empower a District
Magistrate to exercise any of the Powers conferred by section 22 or section 22A or
section 61,
(4) The Chief Inspector and all Inspectors shall be deemed to be public servant within the
meaning of the Indian Penal Code.

6.

(a) Functions of inspectors - The Chief Inspector may, with the approval of the Central
Government and subject to such restrictions or conditions as he may think fit to impose,
by order in writing: authorise any Inspector named or any class of Inspectors specified in
the order to exercise such of the powers of the Chief Inspector under this Act (other than
those relating to appeals) as he may specify.
(2) The Chief Inspector may by order in writing, prohibit or restrict the exercise by any
Inspector named or any class of Inspectors specified in the order of any power conferred
on Inspectors under this Act.
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the Chief Inspector shall
declare the local area or areas within which or the group or class of mines with respect to
which Inspector shall exercise their respective powers.

7.

(1) Powers of Inspectors of Mines – The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may –
(a)make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit, in order to ascertain whether the
provisions of this Act and of the regulations, rules and bye-laws and of any orders made
there under are observed in the case of any mine;
(b) with such assistants, if any, as he thinks fit, inspect and examine any mine or any part
thereof at any time by day or night:
Provided that the power conferred by this clause shall not be exercise in such a manner
as unreasonably to impede or obstruct the working of mine.
(c) examine into, and make inquiry respecting, the state and condition of any mine, or any
part thereof, the ventilation of the mine, the sufficiency of the bye-laws for the time being
in force relating to the mine and all matters and things connected with or relating to the
health, safety and welfare of the persons employed in the mine, and take whether on the
precincts of the mine or elsewhere statements of any person which he may consider
necessary for carrying out the purpose of this Act;
(d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by regulation made by the Central
Government in this behalf.
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub-section to answer any
question or make any statement tending to incriminate himself,
(2) The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may, if he has reason to believe as a result of
any inspection examination or inquiry under this section, that an offence under this Act
has been or is being committed, search any place and take possession of any material or
any plane section register other records appertaining to the mine and the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 shall, so far as may be applicable, applied to any
search or seizure made under this Act as to apply to any search or seizure made under
the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the code.

8.

Powers of special officers to enter, measure, etc. –

Any person in the service of Government duly authorised in this behalf by a special order
in writing of the Chief Inspector or of an Inspector may, for the purpose of surveying
leveling or measuring any mine; or any output therefrom after giving not less than three
days’ notice to the manager of such mine, enter the mine and may survey, level or
measure, the mine or any part thereof or any output therefrom after giving not less than
three days’ notice to the manager of such mine, enter the mine and may survey, level or
measure, the mine or any part thereof or any output therefrom at any time by day or
night:
Provided that, where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or of an Inspector an
emergency exists, he may by order in writing, authorise any such person to enter the
mine for any of the aforesaid purpose without giving any such notice.
9.

Facilities to be afforded to inspectors – Every owner, agent and manager of a mine shall
afford the Chief Inspector and every Inspector and every person authorised under section
8 all reasonable facilities for making any entry, Inspection; survey, measurement,
examination or inquiry under this Act.
“6A. Facilities to be provided for occupational health survey(i) The Chief Inspector or an Inspector or other officer authorised by him in writing in this
behalf, may at any time during the normal working hours of the mine or at any time by
day or night as may be necessary undertake safety and occupational health survey in a
mine after giving notice in writing to the manager of the mines and the owner, agent or
manager of the mine shall afford all necessary facilities (including facilities for the
examination and testing of plant and machinery for the collection of samples and other
data pertaining to the survey and for the transport and examination of any persons
employed in the mine chosen for the survey) to such Inspector or officer.
(2) Every person employed in a mine who is chosen for examination in any safety and
occupational health survey under sub-section (10 shall present himself for such
examination and at such place as may be necessary and shall furnish all information
regarding his work and health in connection with the said survey.
(3) The time spent by any person employed in a mine who is chosen for examination in
the safety and occupational health survey, shall be counted towards his working time, so
however that any overtime shall be paid at the ordinary rate of wages.
Explantion: For the purpose of this sub-section, “ordinary rate of wages” means
the basic wages plus any dearness allowance and underground allowance and
compensation in case including such compensation, if any accruing through the free
issue of foodgrains and edible oils as persons employed in a mine may, for the time
being, be entitled to, but does not include a bonus (other than a bonus given as incentive
for production) or any compensation accruing through the provision of amenities such as
free housing, free supply of coal, medical and educational facilities, sickness allowance,
supply of kerosen oil baskets, tools and uniforms.
(4) Any person who, on examination under sub-section (2) is found medically unfit to
discharge the duty which he was discharging in a mine immediately before such
presentation shall be entitled to undergo medical treatment at the cost of the owner,
agent and manager with full wages during the period of such treatment.
(5) If, after the medical treatment, the person referred to in sub-section (4) is declared
medically unfit to discharge the duty which he was discharging in a mine immediately
before absenting himself from the said examination and such unfitness is directly
describable to his employment in the mine before such presentation, the owner, agent
and manager shall provide such person with an alternative employment in the mine for
which he is medically fit :
Provided that where no such alternative employment is immediately available,
such person shall be paid by the owner, agent and manager disability allowance
determined in accordance with the rates prescribed in this behalf;

Provided further that where such person decides to leave his employment in the
mine, he shall be paid by the owner, agent and manager a lump sum amount by way of
disability compensation determined in accordance with the rates prescribed in this behalf.
(6) The rates under the provision sub-section (5) shall be determined having regard to the
monthly wages of the employees, the nature of disabilities and other related factors.”
10.

Secrecy information obtained :-(1) All copies of, and extracts from registers or other record appertaining to any mi9ne
and all other information acquired by the Chief Inspector or an Inspector or by any one
assisting him, in the course of the inspection or survey of any mine under this Act or
acquired by any person authorised under section 8 or section 9A in the exercise of his
duties thereunder, shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be disclosed to any
person or authority unless the Chief Inspector or the Inspector considers disclosure
necessary to ensure the health, safety or welfare of any person employed in the mine or
any other mine adjacent thereof.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the disclosure of any such information (if so
required) to –
“(a) any court;
(b) a Committee or court of inquiry constituted or appointed under section 12 or section
24, as the case may be:
(c) an official supervisor or the owner, agent or manager of the concerned mine:
(d) a Commissioner for workmen’s compensation appointed under the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923;
(e) the Controller Indian Bureau of Mines.
(f) any registered or recognised trade union;
(g) such other officer, authority and organisation as may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government.”
(3) If the Chief Inspector, or an Inspector or any other person referred to in sub-section
(1) discloses contrary to the provisions of this section, any such information as aforesaid
without the consent of the Central Government,
he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
(4) No court shall proceed to the trial of any offence under this section except with the
previous sanction of the General Government.

11.

Certifying Surgeons :-(1) The Central Government may appoint qualified medical practitioners to be certifying
surgeons for the purpose of this Act within such local limits or for such mine or class or
description of mines as it may assign to them respectively.
(2) Subject to such conditions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, a
certifying surgeon may, with the approval of the Central Government, authorise any
qualified medical practitioner to exercise all or any of his powers under this Act for such
period as the certifying surgeon may specify, and references to a certifying surgeon shall
be deemed to include references to any qualified medical practitioner when so authorise.
(3) No person shall be appointed to be or authorised to exercise the powers of certifying
surgeon, or, having been so appointed or authorised, continue to exercise such powers,
who is or becomes the owner, agent or manager of a mine, or is or becomes directly or
indirectly interested therein, or in any process or business carried on therein or in any
patent or machinery connected therewith, or is otherwise in the employment of the mine.
(4) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed in connection
with -(a) ***
(b) the examination of persons engaged in a mine in such dangerous occupations or
processes as may be prescribed:
(c) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed for any mine or class
or description of mines where(i) cases of illness have occurred which it is reasonable to believe are due to the nature
of any process carried on or other conditions of work prevailing in the mine.
(ii) ***

-----

CHAPTER – III
‘COMMITTEES’
12.

Committees :(1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as that Government may by
notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf constitute for the purposes of this
Act, a Committee consisting of (a)
a person in the service of the Government, not being the Chief Inspector or an
Inspector, appointed by the Central Government to as Chairman:
(b)
the Chief Inspector of mines;
(c)
two persons to represent the interests of miners appointed by the Central
Government;
(d)
two persons to represent the interests of owners of mines appointed by the
Central Government;
(e)
two qualified mining engineers not directly employed in the mining industry,
appointed by Central Government :
Provided that one at least of the persons appointed under clause (c) shall be for
representing the interests of workers in coal mines and one at least of the
persons appointed under clause (d) shall be for representing the interests of
owners of coal mines.
(2) Without prejudice to generality of sub-section(1), the Central Government may
constitute one or more Committees to deal with specific matters relating to any part of the
territories to which this Act extends or to a mine or a group of mines and may appoint
members thereof and the provisions of sub-section(1) (except the provision thereto) shall
apply for the constitution of any Committee under this sub-section as they apply for the
constitution of a Committee under that sub-section.
(3) No act or proceeding of a Committee shall be invalid by reason only of the existence
of any vacancy among its members or any defect in the constitution thereof.

13.

Functions of the committee –
(1) The Committee constituted under sub-section (1) of section 12 shall –
(a) consider proposal for making rules and regulations under this Act and make
appropriate recommendations to the Central Government;
(b) enquiry into such accidents or other matters as may be referred to it by the
Central Government from time to time and make reports thereon; and
(c) subject to the provisions of such-section(2), hear and decide any appeals or
objections against notices or orders under this Act or the regulations, rules or
bye-laws thereunder as are required to be referred to it by this Act or as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Chief Inspector shall not take part in the proceedings of the Committee with
respect to any appeal or objection against an order on notice made or issued by him or
act in relation to any matter pertaining to such appeal or objection as a member of the
Committee.

14.

Powers, etc. of the Committees –
(1) A Committee constituted under section 12 may exercise such of the powers of an
Inspector under this Act as it thinks necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes
of discharging its functions under this Act.
(2) A committee constituted under section 12 shall, for the purposes of discharge its
functions have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely :-(a) discovery and inspections;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of documents; and
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed.”

15.

Recovery of expenses –

The Central Government may direct that the expenses of any inquiry conducted by a
committee constituted under section 12 shall be borne in whole or in part by the owner or
agent of the mine concerned, and the amount so directed to be paid may, on application
by the Chief Inspector or an Inspector or to a magistrate having jurisdiction at the place
where the mine is situated or where such owner or agent is for the time being resident,
be recovered by the distress and sale of any movable property within the limits of the
magistrates jurisdiction belonging to such owner or agent.
Provided that the owner or his agent has not paid the amount within six weeks from the
date of receiving the notice from the Central Government or the Chief Inspector of Mines.
-------

CHAPTER - IV
MINING OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT OF MINES
16.

Notice to be given of mining operations –
(1) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall, before the commencement of any
mining operation, give to the Chief Inspector, the Controller, Indian Bureau of Mines
and the District Magistrate of the district in which the mine is situated, notice in writing
in such form and containing such particulars relating to the mine, as may be
prescribed.
(2) Any notice given under sub-section (1) shall be so given as to reach the persons
concerned at least one month before the commencement of any noting operation.

17.

(1) Managers- Save as may be otherwise prescribed, every mine shall be under a sole
manager who shall have the prescribed qualifications and the owner or agent of every
mine shall appoint a person having such qualifications to be the manager:
Provided that the owner or agent may appoint himself as manager if he possesses the
prescribed qualifications.
(2) Subject to any instruction given to him by or on behalf of the owner or agent of the
mine, the manager shall be responsible for the overall management, control, supervision
and direction of the mine and all such instructions when given by the owner or agent shall
be confirmed in writing forthwith.
(3) Except in case of an emergency, the owner or agent of a mine or anyone on his
behalf shall not give otherwise than through the manager, instructions affecting the
fulfilment of his statutory duties, to a persons, employed in a mine, who is responsible to
the manager.

18.

Duties and responsibilities of owners, agents and managers :(1) the owner and agent of every mine shall each be responsible for making financial
and other provisions and for taking such other steps as may be necessary for
compliance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations, rules, bye-laws and
orders made thereunder.
(2) The responsibility in respect of matters provided for in the rules made under clauses
(d), (e) and (p) of section 58 shall be exclusively carried out by the owner and agent
of the mine and by such person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent
may appoint for securing compliance with the aforesaid provisions.
(3) If the carrying out of any instructions given under sub-section (2) or given otherwise
than through the manager under sub-section(3) of section 17 results in the
contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye-laws or
orders made thereunder, every person giving such instructions shall also be liable for
the contravention of the provision concerned.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections(1), (2) and (3) the owner, agent and
manager of every mine shall each be responsible to see that all operations carried on
in connection with the mine are conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and of the regulations, rules, bye-laws and orders made thereunder.

(5) In the event of any contravention by any person whosoever of any of the provisions
of this Act or of the regulations; rules, bye-laws or orders made thereunder except
those which specifically require any person to do any act or thing, or prohibit any
person from doing an act or thing, besides the person who contravenes, each of the
following persons shall also be deemed to be guilty of such contravention unless he
proves that he had used bue diligence to secure compliance with the provisions and
had taken reasonable means to prevent such contravention:
(i) the official or officials appointed to perform duties of supervision in respect of the
provisions contravened;
(ii) the manager of the mine;
(iii) the owner and agent of the mine;
(iv) the person appointed, if any, to carry out the responsibility under sub-section (2).
Provided that any of the persons aforesaid may not be proceeded against if it
appears on enquiry and investigation that he is not prima facieliable.
(6) It shall not be a defence in any proceedings brought against the owner or agent of a
mine under this section that the manager and other official have been appointed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act or that a person to carry the responsibility
under sub-section (2) has been appointed."

-----CHAPTER – V
PROVISION AS TO HEALTH AND SAFETY
19.

Drinking water --(1)
In every mine effective arrangement shall be made to provide and maintain at
suitable points conveniently situated a sufficient supply of coal and wholesome drinking
water for all persons employed therein:
Provided that in case of persons employed below ground the Chief Inspector may, in lieu
of drinking water being provided and maintained at suitable points, permit any other
effective arrangements to be made for such supply.
(2)
All such points shall be legibly marked ‘DRINKING WATER’ in a language
understood by a majority of the persons employed in the mine and no such point shall be
situated withi9n six metres of any washing place, urinal or latrine, unless a shorter
distances is approved in writing by the Chief Inspector.
(3)
In respect of all mines or any class or description of mines, the Central
Government may make rules for securing compliance with the provisions of sub-sections
(1) and (2) and for the examination by prescribed authorities of the supply and distribution
of drinking water.

20.

Conservancy –
(1) There shall be provided, separately for males and females in every mine, a sufficient
number of latrines and urinals of prescribed types so situated as to be convenient
and accessible to persons employed in the mine at all times.
(2) All latrines and urinals provided under sub-section (1) shall be adequately lighted,
ventilated and at all times maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) The Central Government may specify the number of latrines and urinals to be
provided in any mine, in proportion to the number of males and females employed in
the mine and provide for such other matters in respect of sanitation in mines
(including the obligations in this regard of persons employed in the mine) as it may
consider necessary in the interests of the health of the persons employed,

21.

Medical appliance :
(1) In every mine there shall be provided and maintained so as to be readily accessible
during all working hours such number of first-aid boxes or cupboards equipped with
such contents as may be prescribed.
(2) Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be kept in a first-aid box or cupboard or
room.

(3) Every first-aid box or cupboard shall be kept in the charge of a responsible person
who is trained in such first-aid treatment as may be prescribed and who shall always
be readily available during the working hours of the mine.
(4) In every mine there shall be mades to as to be readily available such arrangements
as may be prescribed for the conveyance to hospitals or dispensaries of persons
who, while employed in the mine suffer bodily injury or become ill.
(5) In every mine wherein more than one hundred and fifty persons are employed there
shall be provided and maintained a first-aid room of such size with such equipment
and in the charge of such medical and nursing staff as may be prescribed.
22.

Powers of Inspectors when causes of danger not expressly provided against exist or
when employment of persons is dangerous:(1)If, in respect of any matter for which no express provision is made by or under this Act,
it appears to the Chief Inspector or an Inspector that any mine or part thereof or any
matter, thing or practice in or connected with the mine, or with the control, supervision,
management or defective so as to threaten, or tend to, the bodily injury of any person, he
may give notice, in writing thereof to the owner, agent or manager of the mine and shall
state in the notice the particulars in respect of which he considers the mine or part thereof
or the matter, thing or practice to be dangerous or defective and require the same to be
remedied within such time and in such manner as he may specify in the notice.
(1A) Where the owner, agent or manager of amine fails to comply with the terms of a
notice given under sub-section (1) within the period specified therein, the Chief Inspector
or the Inspector, as the case may be, may by order in writing, prohibit the employment in
or about the mine or any part thereof any person whose employment is not in his opinion
reasonably necessary for securing compliance with the terms of the notice.
(1)Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section(10 the Chief Inspector or
the Inspector as the case may be, by order in writing addressed to the owner, agent or
manager of a mine prohibit the extraction or reduction of pillars or blocks of minerals in
any mine or part thereof, if, in his opinion such operation is likely to cause the crushing of
pillars or blocks of minerals or the premature collapse of any part of the working or
otherwise endanger the mine or the life or safety of persons employed therein or if, in his
opinion, adequate provision against the outbreak of fire or flooding has not been made by
providing for the sealing off and isolation of the part of the mine in which such operation
is contemplated and for restricting the area that might be affected by fire or flooding.
(3)If the Chief Inspector, or an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or special
order in writing by the Chief Inspector, is of opinion that there is urgent and immediate
danger to the life or safety of any person employed in any mine or part thereof, he may,
by order in writing containing a statement of the grounds of his opinion, prohibit, until he
is satisfied that the danger is removed the employment in or about the mine or any part
thereof of any person whose employment is not in his opinion reasonably necessary for
the purpose of removing the danger.
(3A) Every person whose employment is prohibited under sub-section (1A) of sub-section
(3) shall be entitled to payment of full wages for the period for which he would have been,
but for the prohibition in employment and the owner agent or manager shall be liable for
payment of such full wages of that person:
Provided that the owner, agent or manager may instead of paying such full provide such
person with an alternative employment at the same wages which such person was
receiving in the employment which was prohibited.”
(4) Where notice has been given under sub-section (1) or an order made under subsection (1A), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) by an Inspector, the owner, agent or
manager of the mine may within ten days after the receipt of the notice or order, as the
case may be appeal against the same to the Chief Inspector who may confirm, modify or
cancel the notice or order.
(5) The Chief Inspector or the Inspector sending a notice under sub-section (1) or making
an order under sub-section (1A), sub-section(2) or sub-section (3) and the Chief
Inspector making an order (other than an order of cancellation in appeal) under subsection (4) shall forthwith report the same to the Central Government.
(6) If the owner, agent or manager of the mine objects to a notice sent under subsection(1) by the Chief Inspector or to an order made by the Chief Inspector under sub-

section (1A) or sub-section(2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), he may, within twenty
days after the receipt of the notice containing the requisition or of the order or after the
date of the decision on appeal, as the case may be, send his objection in writing stating
the grounds thereof to the Central Government which shall, ordinarily within a period of
two months from the date of receipt of the objection, refer the same to a Committee.
(7) Every notice under sub-section(1) or order under sub-section (1A), sub-section(2) or
sub-section(3) or sub-section (4) to which objection is made under sub-section(6) shall be
complied with, pending the receipt at the mine of the decision of the Committee.
Provided that the Committee may, on the application of the owner, agent or manager,
suspend the operation of a notice under sub-section (1) pending its decision on the
objection.
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the powers of a magistrate under section 144 of the
Code of Criminal procedure 1896. Act V of 1898).
22A

Power to prohibit employment in certain cases:
(1)Where in respect of any matter relating to safety for which express provision is made
by or under this Act, the owner, agent or manager of mine fails to comply with such
provisions, the Chief Inspector may give notice in writing requiring some to be complied
with within such time as he, may specify in the notice or within such extended period of
time as he may, from time to time, specify thereafter.
(2)Where the owner, agent or manager fails to comply with the terms of a notice given
under sub-section(1) within the period specified in such notice or, as the case may be,
within the extended period of time specified under that sub-section, the Chief Inspector
may, by order in writing, prohibit the employment in or about the mine or any part thereof
of any person whose employment is not, in his opinion reasonably necessary for securing
compliance with the terms of the notice.
(3)Every person whose employment is prohibited under sub-section(2), shall be entitled
to payment of full wages for the period for which he would have been, but for the
prohibition, in employment, and the owner, agent or manager shall be liable for payment
of such full wages of that person.
Provided that the owner, agent or manager may, instead of paying such full wages,
provide such person with an alternative employment at the same wages which such
person was receiving in the employment which was prohibited under sub-section(2).
(4) The provisions of sub-section (5), (6) and (7) of section 22 shall apply in relation to a
notice issued under sub-section (1) or an order made under sub-section(2) of this section
as they apply in relation to a notice under sub-section (1) or an order under sub-section
(1A) of that section.”

23.

Notice to be given of accidents :(1) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine:(a) an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily injury, or
(b) an explosion, ignition, spontaneous heating, outbreak of fire or irruption or
inrush of water or other liquid matter, or
(c) an influx of inflammable or noxious gases, or
(d) a breakage of ropes, chains or other gear by which persons or materials are
lowered or raised in a shaft or an incline, or
(e) an overwinding of cages of other means of conveyance in any shaft while
persons or materials are being lowered or raised, or
(f) a premature collapse of any part of the workings, or
(g) any other accident which may be prescribed, the owner, agent or manager of
the mine shall give notice of the occurrence to such authority in such form
and within such time as may be prescribed, and he shall simultaneously post
one copy of the notice on a special notice-board in the prescribed manner at
a place where it may be inspected by trade union officials, and shall ensure
that the notice is kept on the board for not less than fourteen days from the
date of such posting.

(1A) Whenever there occurs in about a mine an accident causing reportable injury to any
person, the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall enter in a register such
occurrence in the prescribed form and copies of such entries shall be furnished to the
Chief Inspector once in quarter.”
(2) Where a notice given under sub-section(1) relates to an accident causing loss of life,
the authority shall make an inquiry into the occurrence within two months of the receipt of
the notice and, if the authority is not the Inspector, he shall cause the Inspector to make
an inquiry within the said period.
(3)The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
accidents other than those specified in sub-sections(1) and (1A) which cause bodily injury
resulting in the enforced absence from work of the person injured for a period exceeding
twenty-four hours shall be entered in a register in the prescribed form or shall be subject
to the provision of sub-section(1) or sub-section (1A), as the case may be.”
(4) A copy of the entries in the register referred to in sub section (3) shall be sent by the
th
owner, agent or manager of the mine, on or before the 20 day of January in the year
following that to which the entries relate to the Chief Inspector.
(5) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident causing loss of life or serious
bodily injury to any person, the place of accident shall not be disturbed or altered before
the arrival or without the consent of the Chief Inspector or the Inspector to who notice of
the accident is required to be given under sub-section(1) of section 23, unless such
disturbances of alteration is necessary to prevent any further accident to remove bodies
of the deceases; or to rescue any person from danger, or unless discontinuance of work
at the place of accident would seriously impede the working of the mine;
Provided that where the Chief Inspector or the said Inspector fails to inspect the
place of accident, within seventy-two hours of the time of the accident, work may be
resumed at the place of the accident.”
24.

Power of Government to appoint court of enquiry in cases of accidents:(1) When any accident of the nature referred to in any of the clauses of sub-section(1) of
sections 23 occurs in or about a mine, the Central Government may if it is of opinion
that a formal inquiry into the causes of and circumstances attending the accident
ought to be held, appoint a competent person to hold such inquiry and may also
appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special knowledge to act as
assessor or assessors in holding the inquiry.
(2) The person appointed to hold such an inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil court
under the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Act V of 1908), for the purpose of enforcing
the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents and
material objects.
(3) Any person holding an inquiry under this section may exercise such of the powers of
an Inspector under this Act as he may think it necessary or expedient to exercise for
the purposes of the inquiry.
(4) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the Central
Government stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances, and adding
any observations which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make.

25.

Notice of certain diseases :(1) Where any person employed in a mine contacts any disease notified by the Central
Government in the official Gazette as a disease connected with mining operations the
owner , agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be, shall send notice thereof
to the Chief Inspector and to such other authorities in such form and within such time
as may be prescribed.
(2) If any medical practitioner attends on a person who is or has been employed in a
mine and who is or is believed by the medical practitioner to be suffereing from any
disease notified under sub-section(1) the medical practitioner shall without delay
send a report in writing to the Chief Inspector stating -(a) the name and address of the patient.
(b) The disease from which the patient is or is believed to be suffering, and
(c) The name and address of the mine in which the patient is or was last employed.

(3) Where the report under sub-section(2) is confirmed to the satisfaction of the Chief
Inspector by the certificate of a certifying surgeon or otherwise that the person is
suffering from a disease notified under sub-section (1), the Chief Inspector shall pay
to the medical practitioner such fee as may be prescribed, and the fee so paid shall
be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue from the owner, agent or manager of the
mine in which the person contracted the disease.
(4) If any medical practitioner fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section(2), he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
26.

Power to direct investigation of causes of diseases :-(1) The Central Government may, if it considers it expedient to do so, appoint a
competent person to inquire into and report it on any case where a disease notified
under sub-section(1) of section 25 has been or suspected to have been contracted in
a mine, and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special
knowledge to act as assessors in such inquiry.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (2) and (3) of section 24 shall apply to an inquiry under
this section in the same manner as they apply to any inquiry under that section.

27.

Publication of reports :The Central Government may cause any report submitted by a Committee under section
12 or any report or extracts from report submitted to it under section 26, and shall cause
every report submitted by a Court of Inquiry under section 14 to be published at such
time and in such manner as it may think fit.
-----

CHAPTER – VI
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT
28.

Weekly day of rest :No person shall be allowed to work in a mine for more than six days in any one week.

29.

Compensatory days of rest :(1) Where in pursuance of action under section 38 or as a result of exempting any mine
or the persons employed therein is from the provisions of section 28, any person
employed therein deprived of any of the weekly days of rest for which provision is
made in section 28, he shall be allowed, within the month in which such days of rest
was due to him or within the two months immediately following that month,
compensatory days of rest equal in number to the days of rest of which he has been
deprived.
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the manner in which the days of rest for
which provision is made in sub-section (1) shall be allowed.

30.

(1) No adult employed above ground in a mine shall be required or allowed to work for
more than forty-eight hours in any week or for more than nine hours in any day:
Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily
maximum hours specified to this sub-section may exceed in order to facilitate the change
of shifts.
(2) The periods or work of any such adult shall be so arranged that along with his interval
for rest, they shall not in any day spread over more than twelve hours, and that he shall

not work for more than five hours continuously before he has had an interval for rest of at
least half an hour:
Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and
subject to such conditions as he may deem fit to impose, permit the spread over to
extend over a period not exceeding fourteen hours in any day.
(3) Persons belonging to two or more shifts shall not be allowed to do work of the same
kind above ground as the same time:
Provided that, for the purpose of this sub-section persons shall not be deemed to
belong to separate shifts by reason only of the fact that they receive their intervals for rest
at different times,
31.

Hours of work below grounds:(1) No person employed below ground in a mine shall be allowed to work for more than
forty-eight hours in any week or for more than eight hours in any day;
Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily
maximum hours specified in this sub-section may be exceeded in order to
facilitate the change of shifts.
(2) No work shall be carried on below ground in any mine except by a system of Shifts
so arranged that the period of work for each shifts is not spread-over more than the
daily maximum hours stipulated in sub-section (1)
(3) No person employed in a mine shall be allowed to be present in any part of a mine
below ground except during the periods of work shown in respect of him in the
register maintained under sub-section (4) of section 48.

32.

Night shifts :Where a person employed in a mine works on a shift which extends beyond midnight –
(a) for the purposes of sections 28 and 29, a weekly day of rest shall mean in his case a
period of twenty-four consecutive hours beginning when his shift ends.
(b) the following day for him shall be deemed to be the period of twenty four hours
beginning when such shifts ends, and the hours he khas worked after midnight shall
be counted in the previous day.

33.

Extra wages for overtime:(1) Where in a mine a person works above ground for more than nine hours in any day
or works below ground for more than eight hours in any day or works for more than
forty-eight hours in any week. Whether above ground or below ground, he shall in
respect of such overtime work be entitled to wages at the rate of twice his ordinary
rate of wages the period of overtime work being calculated on a daily basis or weekly
basis whichever is more favourable to him.
(2) Where any person employed in a mine is paid on piece rate basis, the time-rate shall
be taken as equivalent to the daily average of his full-time earning for the days on
which he actually worked during the week immediately preceeding the week in which
overtime work has been done, exclusive of any overtime, and such time-rate shall be
deemed to be the ordinary rate of wages of such person;
Provided that if such person has not worked in the preceeding week on the same
or identical job, the time rate shall be based on the average for the day he had
worked in the same week excluding the overtime or on the daily average of his
earnings in any preceding week whichever is higher.

Explanation - For the purpose of this section. “ordinary rate of wages” shall
have the same meaning as in the Explanation to sub-section (3) of section 8A.”
(3)
(4) The Central Government may prescribed the register to be maintained in a mine for
the purpose of securing compliance with provisions of this section.
34.

Prohibition of employment of certain persons :
No person shall be required or allowed to work in a mine if he has already been working
in any other mine within the preceding twelve hours.

35.

Limitation of daily hours of work including over-time work:
Save in respect of cases failing within clause (a) and clause (e) of section 39 no person
employed in a mine shall be required or allowed to work in the mine for more than ten
hours in any day inclusive of overtime

36.

Notices regarding hours of work:
(1) The manager of every mine shall cause to be posted outside the office of the mine a
notice in the prescribed form standing the time of the commencement and of the end
of work at the mine and, if it is proposed to work by a system of relays, the time of the
commencement and of the end of work for each relay.
(2) In the case of a mine at which mining operations commence after the
commencement of this Act, the notice referred to in sub-section(1) shall be posted
not less than seven days before the commencement of work.
(3) The notice referred to in sub-section(1) shall also state the time of the
commencement and of the intervals for rest for persons employed above ground and
a copy thereof shall be sent to the Chief Inspector, if he so requires.
(4) Where it is proposed to make any alteration in the time fixed for the commencement
or for the end of work in the mine generally or for any relay or in the rest intervals
fixed for persons employed above ground, an amended notice in the prescribed form
shall be posted outside the office of the mine not less than seven days before the
change is made, and a copy of such notice shall be sent to the Chief Inspector not
less than seven days before such change.
(5) No person shall be allowed to work in a mine otherwise than in accordance with the
notice required by sub-section (1).

37.

Supervising staff :Nothing in section 28, section 30, section 31, section 34 or sub-section (5) of section 6
shall apply to persons who may by rules be defined to be persons holding positions of
supervision or management or employed in a confidential capacity.

38.

Exemption from provisions regarding employment:(1) In case of an emergency involving serious risk to the safety of the mine or of persons
employed therein or in case of an accident, where actual or apprehended, of in case of
any act of God or in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant or equipment
of the mine as the result of break-down of such machinery, plant or equipment, the
manager may, subject to the provisions of section 22 and section 22A and in accordance
with the rules under section 39, permit persons to be employed in contravention of
section 28, section 30, section 31, section 34 or sub-section(5) of section 36, work as
may be necessary to protect the safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein:
Provided that in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant or
equipment under this section, the manager may take the action permitted by this section,
although the production of mineral would thereby be incidentally affected, but any action

so taken shall not exceed the limits necessary for the purpose of avoiding serious
interference with the ordinary working of the mine.
(2) Every case in which action has been taken by the manager under sub-section(1),
shall be recorded together with the circumstances relating thereto and a report thereof
shall also be made to the Chief Inspector or the Inspector.
39.

Power to make exempting rules:-

The Central Government may make rules providing for the exemption to such extent, in
such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be specified from (5) the provisions of
sections 28, 30, 31, 34 or sub-section 50 of section 36 (a)

(b)
(c)

(d)
(e)

40.

of all or any of the persons employed in a mine, where an emergency involving
serious risk to the safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein is
apprehended;
of all or any of the persons so employed in case of an accident, actual or
apprehended.
Of all or any of the persons engaged in work of a preparatory or complementary
nature, which must necessarily be carried on for the purpose of avoiding serious
interference with the ordinary working of the mine.
Of all or any of the persons engaged in urgent repairs and
Of all or any of the persons employed in any work, which for technical reasons
must be carried on continuously.

Employment of persons below eighteen years of age :(1) After the commencement of the Mine (Amendment) Act, 1983, no person below
eighteen years of age shall be allowed to work in any mine or part thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), apprentices and other
trainees, not below sixteen years of age, may be allowed to work, under proper
supervision, in a mine or part thereof by the manager:
Provided that, in the case of trainees, other than apprentices prior approval of the
Chief Inspector or an Inspector shall be obtained before they are allowed to work.
Explanation - In this section and in section 43, “apprentice” means an apprentice as
defined in clause (a) of section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961.

41. ***
42. ***
43.

Power to require medical examination :(1) Where an Inspector is of opinion that any person employed in a mine otherwise than
as apprentice or other trainee is not an adult or that any person employed in a mine
as an apprentice or other trainee is either below sixteen years of age or is no longer
fit to work, the Inspector may serve on the manager of the mine a notice requiring
that such person shall be examined by a certifying surgeon and such person shall be
examined by a certifying surgeon and such person shall not, if the Inspector so
directs, be employed or permitted to work in any mine until this has been so
examined and has been certified that he is an adult or, if such person is an
apprentice or trainee that he is not below sixteen years of age and is fit to work.
(2) Every certificate granted by a certifying surgeon on a reference under sub-section(1),
shall, for the purpose of this Act, be conclusive evidence of the matters referred
therein.

44.
45.

Prohibition of the presence of persons below eighteen years of age in a mine :-

Subject to the provisions of sub-section(2) of section 40, after such date as the Central
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, no person
below eighteen years of age shall be allowed to be present in any part of a mine above
ground where any operation connected with or incidental to any mining operation is being
carried on”

46.

Employment of women :(1) No woman shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, be employed(a) in any part of a mine which is below-ground.
(b) In any mine above ground except between the hours 6 am and 7 am.
(2) Every woman employed in a mine above ground shall be allowed an interval of not
less than eleven hours between the termination of employment on any one day and
the commencement of the next period of employment.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section(1) the Central Government may,
by notification in the official Gazette, very the hours of employment above ground of
women in respect of any mine or class or description of mine, so however that no
employment of any woman between the hours 10 am and 5 am is permitted thereby.

47.

Disputes as to age Rep. By the Mine (Amendment) Act 1959 (62 of 1959), S.28.

48.

Register of persons employed:(1) For every mine there shall be kept in the prescribed form and place Register of all
persons employed in the mine showing in respect of each such person –
(a) the name of the employee with the name of his father or, of her husband, as the
case may be, and such other particulars may be necessary for purpose of
identification,
(b) the age and sex of the employee;
(c) the nature of employment (whether above ground or below ground, and if above
ground, whether in opencast working or otherwise) and date of commencement
thereof;
(d)
(e) Such other particulars as may be prescribed, and the relevant entries shall be
authenticated by the signature or the thumb impression of the person concerned,
(2) The entries in the register prescribed by sub-section(1) shall be such that workers
working in accordance there with would not be working in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Chapter.
(3) No person shall be employed in a mine until the particulars required by sub-section
(1) have been recorded in the register in respect of such person and no person shall
be employed except during the period of work shown in respect of him in register.
(4) For every mine other than a mine which for any special reason to be recorded, is
exempted by the Central Government by general or special order, there shall be kept
in the prescribed form and place separate registers showing in respect of each
person employed in the mine:(a) below ground
(b) above ground in opencast workings, and
(c) above ground in other cases :(i)the name of the employees;
(ii)the class or kind of his employment
(iii)where work is carried on by a system of relays, the shift to which he belongs
and the hours of the shift.
(5) The register of persons employed below ground referred to in-sub section (4) shall
show at any moment the name of every person who is then present below ground in
the mine.
(6) No person shall enter any opencast working or any working below ground unless he
has been permitted by the manager or is authorised under this Act or any other law to
do so.

CHAPTER – VII
LEAVE WITH WAGES
49.

Application of Chapter –
The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice of any right to which a
person employed in a mine may be entitled under any other law or under the terms of any
award, agreement or contract of service.
Provided that if such award, agreement or contract of service, provides for a longer
annual leave with wages than that provided in this Chapter, the quantum of leave, which
the person employed shall be entitled to, shall be in accordance with such award,
agreement or contract of service but leave shall be regulated in accordance with the
provisions of section 50 to 56 (both inclusive) with respect of matters not provided for in
such award, agreement or contract of service.”

50.

Leave defined :
For the purposes of this Chapter leave shall not include weekly days of rest or holidays or
festivals or other similar occasions whether occurring during or at either end of the
period.

51.

Calendar year defined :
For the purpose of this Chapter a calendar year shall mean the period of twelve months
beginning with the first day of January in any year.

52.

Annual leave wages :(1) Every person employed in a mine who has completed a calendar year’s service
therein shall be allowed, during the subsequent calendar year leave with wages,
calculated –
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground, at the rate of one day for every
fifteen days of work performed by him, and
(b) in any other case, at the rate of one day for every twenty days of work performed
by him.
(2) A calendar year’s service referred to in sub-section(1) shall be deemed to have
completed:(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine, if he has during the
calendar year put in not less than one hundred and ninety attendances at the
mine; and
(b) in the case of any other person, if he has during the calendar year put in not less
than two hundred and forty attendances at the mine.
Explanation – For the purpose of this sub-section :(a) any days of lay-off by agreement or contact or as per missible under the
standing order:
(b) in the case of a female employee, maternity leave for any number of days
not exceeding twelve weeks; and
(c) the leave earned in the year prior to that in which the leave is enjoyed:
shall be deemed to be the days on which the employee has worked in mine
for the purpose of computation of the attendances but he shall not earn leave
for these days.

(3) A person whose service commences otherwise than on the first day of January shall
be entitled to leave with wages in the subsequent calendar year at the rates specified
in sub-section(1), if –
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine, he has put in
attendances for not less than one half of the total number of days during the
remainder of the calendar year: and
(b) in any other case, he has put in attendances for not less than two-thirds of the
total number of days during the remainder of the calendar year.
(4) Any leave not taken by a person to which he is entitled in any one calendar year
under sub-section(1) or sub-section(3) shall be added to the leave to be allowed to
him under sub-section(1) during the succeeding calendar year.
Provided that the total number of days of leave which may be accumulated by any
such person shall not at any one time exceed thirty days in all.
Provided further than any such person who has applied for leave with wages but has
not been given such leave in accordance with sub-section(6) shall be entitled to carry
forward the unavailed leave without any limit.
(5) Any such person may apply in writing to the manager of the mine not less than fifteen
days before the day on which he wishes his leave to begin, for all leave or any
portion thereof then allowable to him under sub-section (1), (3) and (4).
Provided that the number of times in which leave may be taken during any one
calendar year shall not exceed three.
(6) An application for such leave made in accordance with sub-section (5) shall not be
refused unless the authority empowered to grant the leave is of opinion that owing to
the exigencies of the situation the leave should be refused.
(7) If a person employed in a mine wants to avail himself of the leave with wages due to
him to cover a period of illness he shall be granted such leave even if the application
for leave is not made within the time specified in sub-section(5).
(8) If the employment of a person employed in a mine is terminated by the owner, agent
or manager of the mine before he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled
up to the day of termination of his employment, or if such person having applied for
and having not been granted such leave, quits his employment before he has taken
the leave, the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall pay him the amount
payable under section 53 in respect of the leave not taken and such payment shall
be made where the employment of the person is terminated by the owner, agent or
manager, before the expiry of the second working day after such termination, and
where a person himself quits his employment, on or before the next pay day.
(9) The unavailed leave of a person employed in mine shall not be taken into
consideration in computing the period of any notice required to be given before the
termination of his employment.
(10)Where the person employed in a mine is discharged or dismissed from service or
quits his employment or is superannuated or dies while in service, he or his heirs or
wages in lieu of leave due to him calculated at the rate specified in sub-section (1), if(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine, he has put in
attendance for not less than one-half of the total number of days from the
date of his employment to the date of his discharge or dismissal or quitting of
employment or superannuation or death, and
(b) in any other case, he has put in attendance for not less than two thirds of the
total number of days from the date of his employment to the date of his
discharge or dismissal or quitting of employment of superannuation or death,
and payment of such wages shall be made by the owner, agent or manager
of the mine at the rate specified in section 53, where the person is
discharged or dismissed from service or quits employment or is
superannuated, before the expiry of the second working day after such
discharge dismissal, quitting of employment or superannuation, as the case
may be and where the person employed dies while in service within a period
of two months of his death.”

Explanation – For the purpose of sub-section (1), and (10), any fracatioin of
leave of half day or more, half a day shall be omitted.
53.

Wages during leave period :For the leave allowed to a person employed in a mine under section 52, he shall be paid
at a rate equal to the daily average of his total full-time earnings for the days on which he
was employed during the month immediately preceeding his leave, exclusive of any
overtime wages and bonus but inclusive of any dearness allowance and compensation in
cash including such compensation, if any accruing through the free issue of foodgrains
and other articles as persons employed in the mine may, for the time being, be entitled
to:
Provided that if no such average earning are available, then the average shall be
computed on the basis of the daily average of the total full time earnings of all persons
similarly employed for the same months.

54.

Payment in advance in certain cases:Any person employed in a mine who has been allowed leave for not less than four days
shall before his leave begins be paid the wages due for the period of the leave allowed.

55.

Mode of recovery of unpaid wages –
Any sum required to be paid by the owner, agent or manager of a mine under this
Chapter but not paid by him shall be recoverable as delayed wages under the provisions
of the payment of Wages Act. 1936.

56.

Power to exempt mines:Where the Central Government is satisfied that the leave rules applicable to persons
employed in any mine provide benefits which in its opinion are not less favourable than
those provided for in this Chapter it may, by order in writing and subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein exempt the mine from all or any of the provisions
of the Chapter.

CHAPTER – VIII
REGULATIONS, RULES AND BYE-LAWS
57.

Power of Central Government to make regulations:The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette make regulations
consistent with this Act for all or any of the following purposes, namely:
(a) for prescribing the qualifications required for appointment as Chief Inspector
or Inspector;
(b) for prescribing and regulating the duties and powers of the Chief Inspector
and of Inspectors in regard to the inspection of mines under this Act;
(c) for prescribing the duties of owners, agents and managers of mines and
persons acting under them and for prescribing the qualifications 9including
age) of agents and managers of mines and of persons acting under them.
(d) for requiring facilities to be provided for enabling managers of mines and
other persons acting under them to efficiently discharge their duties.
(e) for regulating the manager of ascertaining, by examination or otherwise, the
qualification of managers of mines and persons acting under them and the
granting and renewal of certificates of competency.
(f) for fixing the fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such examinations and of
the grant and renewal of such certificates.
(g) For determining the circumstances in which and the conditions in respect to
which it shall be lawful for more mines than one to be under a single
manager, or for any mine or mines to be under a manager not having the
prescribed qualifications.

(h) For providing for inquiries to be made under this including any inquiry
relating to misconduct or incompetence on the part of any person holding a
certificate under this Act and for the suspension or cancellation of any such
certificate and for providing where ever necessary,
that the person
appointed to hold an inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, (V of 1908) for the purpose of enforcing
the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents
and material objects.
(i) For regulating, subject to the provisions of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884,
(IV of 1884) and of any rules made thereunder, the strong, conveyance and
use of explosive,
(j) For prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of
women in
mines or in any class of mines of on particular kind of labour which are
attended by danger to the life, safety, or health of such persons and for
limiting the weight of any single load that may be carried by any such person;
(k) For providing for the safety of the persons employed in a mine, their means
of entrance thereinto and exit therefrom the number of shafts or outlets to be
furnished; and the fencing of shafts, pits, outlets, pathway and subsidences;
(l) For prohibiting the employment in a mine either as manager or in any other
specified capacity of any person except persons paid by the owner of the
mine and directly answerable to the owner or manager of the mine;
(m) For providing for the safety of the roads and working places in mines,
including the sitting; maintenance and extraction or reduction of pillars or
blocks of minerals and the maintenance of sufficient barriers between mine
and mine;
(n) For the inspection of workings and sealed off fire-areas in a mine, and for the
restriction of workings in the vicinity of the sea or any lake or river or any
other body of surface water, whether natural or artificial, or of any public road
or building and for requiring due precaution to be taken against the irruption
or inrush of water or other matter into, outbreak of fire in or premature
collapse of any workings;
(o) For providing for the ventilation of mines and the action to be taken in respect
of dust fire, and inflammable and noxious gases, including precautions
against spontaneous combustion, under ground fire and coal dust;
(p) For regulating subject to the provisions of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910(X of
1910) and of any rules made thereunder, the generation, storage,
transformation transmission and use of electricity in mines and for providing
for the care and the regulation of the use of all electrical apparatus and
electrical cables in mines and of all other machinery and plant therein.
(q) For regulating the use of machinery in mines, for providing for the safety of
persons employed on or near such machinery and on haulage roads and for
restricting the use of certain classes of locomotives underground;
(r) For providing for proper lighting of mines and regulating the use of safety
lamps therein and for the search of persons entering a mine in which safety
lamps are in use;
(s) For providing against explosions or ignitions of inflammable gas or dust or
irruption or accumulations of water in mines and against danger arising
therefrom and for prohibiting restricting or regulating the extraction of
minerals in circumstances likely to result in the premature collapse of
workings or to result in or to aggravate collapse of workings or irruption of
water or ignitions in mines;
(t) For prescribing under clause(g) of sub-section(1) of section 2, the types of
accidents and for prescribing the notices of accidents and dangerous
occurrences and the notices reports and returns of mineral output; persons
employed and other matters provided for by regulations to be furnished by
owners, agents and managers of mines, and for prescribing the forms of
such notices, returns and reports, the persons and authorities to whom they
are to be furnished the particulars to be contained in them and the time within
which they are to be submitted;

(u) For requiring owners, agents and managers of mines to have fixed
boundaries for the mine, for prescribing the plans and sections and field
notes connected therewith to be kept by them and the manager and places
in which such plans, section and field notes are to be kept for purposes of
record for the submission of copies thereof to the Chief Inspector; and for
requiring making of fresh surveys and plans by them and in the event of noncompliance, for having the survey made and plans prepared through and
other agency and for the recovery of expenses thereof in the same manner
as an arrear of land revenue:
(v) For regulating the procedure on the occurrence of accidents or accidental
explosions or ignitions in or about mines for dealing effectively with the
situation.
(w) For prescribing the form of, and the particulars to be contained in the notice
to be given by the owner, agent or manager of a mine under section 16;
(x) For prescribing the notice to be given by the owner, agent or manager of
mining before mining operations are commenced at or extended to any point
within forty-five metres of any railway subject to the provisions of the Indian
Railways Act, 1890, (IX of 1890) of any public roads or other works, as the
case may be which are maintained by the Government or any local authority.
(y) For the protection from injury, in respect of any mine when the workings are
discontinued, property vested in the Government or any local authority or
railway company as defined in the Indian Railways Act, 1890.
(yy) for requiring protective works to be constructed by the owner, agent or
manager or a mine before the mine is closed, and in the event of noncompliance, for getting such works executed by any other agency, and for
recovering the expenses, thereof from such owner in the same manner as
an arrear of land revenue;
(z) for providing for the appointment of Courts of Inquiry under quarry, incline,
shaft pit or outlet, whether the same is being worked or not or any
dangerous or prohibited area, subsidence haulage, tramline or pathway,
where such fencing is necessary for the protection of the public; and
(zz) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed
58.

Power of Central Government to make rules –
The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rule consistent
with this Act for all or any of the following purposes, namely (a) for providing the term of office and other conditions of service of and the
manner of filling vacancies among, the members of a Committee and for
regulating the procedure to be followed by a Committee for transacting its
business.”
(b) For prescribing the form of the register referred to in sub-section (3) of
section 23;
(c) For providing for the appointment of Courts of Inquiry under section 24, for
regulating the procedure and powers of such Courts for the payment of
travelling allowance to the members, and for the recovery of the expenses of
such courts including any other expenses connected with the inquiry in the
same manner as an area of land revenue from the manager, owner or agent
of the mine concerned;
(cc) for providing the inspection of mines to be carried out on behalf of the
persons employed therein by a technical expert (not less than an overman in
status) the facilities therefore, the frequency at which and the manner in which
such inspections are to be carried out and the manner in which reports of such
inspections are to be made.
(d) for requiring the maintenance of the mines wherein any women employed or
were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months of suitable rooms
to be reserved for the use of children under the age of six years belonging to
such women, and for prescribing, either generally or with particular reference
to the number of women employed in the mine, the number of standards of
such rooms, and the nature and extent of the amenities to be provided and
the supervision to be exercised therein;

(e) for requiring the maintenance at or near pitheads of bathing places equipped
with shower baths and of locker rooms for the use of men employed in mines
and of similar and separate places and rooms for the use of women in mines
where women are employed and for prescribing either generally or with
particular reference to the numbers of men and women ordinarily employed
in a mine, the number and standards of such places and rooms.
(f) For prescribing the standard of sanitation to be maintained and the scale of
latrine and urinal accommodation to be provided at mines, the provision to be
made for the supply of drinking water.
(ff) for providing for the supply and maintenance of medical appliances and
comforts and for prescribing the contents and number of first-aid boxes and
cupboards, the training in first-aid work, the size and equipment of first-aid rooms
and staff in charge thereof and the arrangements for conveyance of injured
persons to hospitals or dispensaries;
(fff)for requiring the imparting of practical instruction to, or the training of, persons
employed or to be employed in mines otherwise than in a position of such
instruction and training;
(g) for prohibiting the possession or consumption of intoxicating drinks or drugs
in a mine and the entry or presence therein of any person in a drunken state;
(h) for prescribing the form of notices required under section 36, and for
requiring such notices to be posted also in specified languages;
(i) for defining the person who shall, for the purpose of section 37, be deemed
to be persons holding positions of supervision of management employed in
a confidential capacity;
(j) for prohibiting the employment in mines of persons or any class of persons
who have not been certified by a qualified medical practitioner to have
completed their fifteenth year, and for prescribing the manner and the
circumstances in which such certificates may be granted and revoked;
(k)
(kk) for requiring persons employed or seeking employment at mines to submit
themselves for medical examination and for prohibiting on medical grounds the
employment of any person at a mine either absolutely or in a particular capacity
or in particular work;
(l) for prescribing the form of registers required by section 48 and the
maintenance and form or registers for the purposes of Chapter VII;
(m) for prescribing abstracts of this Act and of the regulations and rules and the
language in which the abstracts and bye-laws shall be posted as required by
section 61 and 62;
(n) for requiring notices, returns and reports in connection with any matters dealt
with by rules to be furnished by owners; agents and managers of mines and
for prescribing the forms of such notices returns and reports, the persons and
authorities to whom they are to be furnished, the particulars to be contained
in them, and the times within which they are to be submitted;
(o) for requiring the provision and maintenance in mines; wherein more than fifty
persons are ordinarily employed, of adequate and suitable shelters for taking
food with provisions for drinking water.
(p) For requiring the provision and maintenance in any mine specified in this
behalf by the Chief Inspector or Inspector wherein more than two hundred
and fifty persons are ordinarily employed of a canteen or canteen for the use
of such persons;
(q) For requiring the employment in every mine wherein five hundred or more
persons are ordinarily employed of such number of welfare officers as may
be specified and for prescribing the qualifications and the terms and
conditions of, and the duties to be performed by, such welfare officers;
(r) For requiring the establishment of rescue stations for specified mines or
groups of specified mines or for all mines in a specified area and for
prescribing how and by whom such stations shall be established;
(s) For providing for the management of rescue stations

(sa)for providing for the standards of physical fitness and other qualifications of
the persons constituting rescue brigades;
(sb)prescribing the places of residence of the persons constituting rescue
brigades;
(t) for prescribing the position, equipment, control, maintenance and functions of
rescue stations;
(u) for providing for the levy and collection of a duty of excise(at) a rate not
exceeding twenty five paise per tonne) on coke and coal produced in and
despatched from mines specified under clause(r), the creation of a rescue
stations fund for such mines, the crediting to such fund of such sums of
money as the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide from out of the proceeds of such
cess credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, the manner in which the
money from such fund shall be utilised and the administration of such fund;
(v) for providing for the formation, training composition and duties of rescue
brigades and generally for the conduct of rescue work in mines;
(vv) for providing for the constitution of safety Committees for specified mine or
groups of specified mines or for all mines in a specified area for promoting safety
and for laying down the composition, manner of formation and functions of such
safety Committees and, “
(w) generally to provide for any matter not provided for by this Act or the
regulations, provision for which is required in order to give effect to this Act.
59.

Prior publication of regulations and rules –
(1) The power to make regulations and rules conferred by section 57 and 58 is subject to
the condition of the regulations and rules being made after previous publication.
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause (3) of section 23 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897, (IX of 1897) as that after which a draft of regulations or rules
proposed to be made will be taken under consideration, shall not be less than three
months from the date on which the draft of the proposed regulations or rules
published for general information.
(3)
(4) no regulation or rule shall be made unless the draft thereof has been referred to the
Committee constituted under-sub-section(1)
of section 12 and unless that
Committee has had a reasonable opportunity of reporting as to the expediency of
making the same and as to the suitability of its provisions;
(5) Regulation and rules shall be published in the official Gazette and, on such
publication, shall have effect as if enacted in this Act.
(6) The provisions of sub-section (1), (2) and (4) shall not apply to the first occasion on
which rules referred to in clause (d) or clause (e) section 58 are made.
(7)

60.

Power to make regulations without previous Publications –
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), (2) and (4) of section 59,
regulations under
section 57 may be made without previous publication and without
reference to the Committee, constituted under sub-section (1) of section 12, of the
Central Government is satisfied that for the prevention of apprehended danger or the
speedy remedy of conditions likely to cause danger it is necessary in making such
regulations to dispense with the delay that would result from such publication and
reference:
Provided that any regulation so made shall be send to the said committee for information
and shall not remain in force for more than one year from the making thereof.
(1) The owner, agent or manager of a mine may, and shall, if called upon to do so by the
Chief Inspector or Inspector, frame and submit to the Chief Inspector or Inspector a
draft of such bye-laws, not being inconsistent with this Act or any regulations or rules
for the time being in force, governing the use of any particular machinery or the such
adoption of a particular method of working the mine as owner, agent or manager may
deem necessary to prevent accidents and provide for the safety, convenience and
discipline of the persons employed in the mine.

(2) If any such owner, agent or manager –
(a) falls to submit within two months a draft of bye-laws after being called upon to do
so by the Chief Inspector or Inspector, or
(b) submits a draft of bye-laws which is not in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or
Inspector sufficient, the Chief Inspector or Inspector may –
(i) propose a draft of such bye-laws as appear to him to be sufficient, or
(ii)propose such amendment in any draft submitted to him by the owner, agent or
manager as will, in his opinion, render it sufficient, and shall send such draft or
bye-laws or draft amendment to the owner agent or manager as the case may
be, for consideration.
(3) If within a period of two months from the date on which any draft bye-laws or draft
amendments are sent by the Chief Inspector or Inspector to the owner, agent or
manager under the provisions of sub-section(2), the Chief Inspector or Inspector and
the owner, agent or manager are unable to agree as to the terms of the bye-laws to
be made under sub-section(1) the Chief Inspector or Inspector shall refer the draft
bye-laws for settlement to the Committee constituted under sub-section(1) of section
12,
(4) (a)When such draft bye-laws have been agreed to by the owner, agent or manager
and the Chief Inspector or Inspector or, which they are unable to agree, have been
settled by the Committee constituted under sub-section (1) of section 12, a copy of
the draft bye-laws shall be sent by the Chief Inspector or Inspector to the Central
Government for approval.
(b)The Central Government may make such modification of the draft bye-laws as it
thinks fit.
(c)Before the Central Government approves the draft bye-laws, whether with or
without modifications there shall be published in such manner as the Central
Government may think best adopted for informing the persons affected, notice to the
proposal to make the bye-laws and of the place where copies of the draft bye-laws
may be obtained, and of the time (which shall not be less than thirty days within
which any objections with reference to the draft bye-laws, made by or on behalf of
persons affected should be sent in writing and shall state –
(d)Every objection shall be in writing and shall state –
(i) the specific grounds of objections and
(ii) the omissions, additions or modifications asked for
(e)The Central Government shall consider any objection made within the required
time by or on behalf of persons appearing to it to be affected and may approve the
bye-laws either in the form in which they were published or after making amendments
thereto as it thinks fit.
(5)The bye-laws, when so approved by the Central Government shall have effect as if
enacted in this Act, and the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall cause a copy of
the bye-laws, in English and in such other language or languages as may be prescribed,
to be posted up in some conspicuous place at or near the mine, where the bye laws may
be conveniently read or seen by the persons employed; as often as the same become
defaced obliterated or destroyed, shall cause them to be renewed with all reasonable
despatch.
(6)The Central Government may, order in writing rescind the whole or in part, any byelaws so made, and thereupon such bye-laws shall cease to have effect accordingly.
61 A.

Laying of regulations, rules and bye-laws before parliament.
Every regulation made under section 57, every rule made under section 58 and every
bye-law made under section 61d shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each house of parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the
expiry of the session aforesaid, both houses agree in making any modification in the
regulation, rule or bye-law should not be made, the regulation, rule or bye-law shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so however that any such modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the

62.

validity of anything previously done under that regulation, rule or bye-law, as the case
may be.”
Posting of abstracts from Act, regulations etc.
There shall be kept posted up at or near every mine in English and in such other
language or languages as may be prescribed, the prescribed abstracts of the Act and of
the regulations and rules.
CHAPTER – IX
PENALTIES AND KPROCEDURE

63.

Obstruction –
(1) Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector and inspector or any person authorised under
section 8 in the discharge of his duties under this Act. refuses of wilfully neglects to
afford the Chief Inspector, Inspector or such person any reasonable facility for
making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act
in relation to any mine shall be punishable with imprisonment of a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
both.
(2) Whoever refuses to produce on the demand of the Chief Inspector or any registers or
other documents kept in pursuance of this Act. or prevents or attempts to prevent or
does any thing which he has reason to believe to be likely to prevent any person
from appearing before or being examined by an inspecting officer acting in
pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to three hundred rupees.
64. Falsification of records –
Whoever –
(a) counterfoils, or knowingly makes a false statement in any certificate, or any official copy
of a certificate, granted under this Act, or
(b) knowingly uses as true any such counterfeit or false certificate, or
(c) makes or produces or uses any false declaration, statement or evidence knowing the
same to be false for the purpose of obtaining for himself or for any other person a
certificate or the renewal of a certificate under this Act, or any employment in a mine, or
(d) falsifies any plan, section, register or record, the maintenance of which is required by or
under this Act or produces before any authority such false plan, section, register or
record, knowing the same to be false or;
(e) makes, gives or delivers any plan, return, notice, record or report containing a statement,
entry or detail which is not to the best of his knowledge or belief true, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
65.

Use of false certificates of fitness Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate of fitness granted to himself
under section 43 a certificate granted to another person under that section, or having
been granted a certificate of fitness to himself under that section, knowingly allows it to
be used, or allows an attempt to use it to be made by another person shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.

66.

Omission to furnish plans etc.
Any person who, without reasonable excuse the burden of providing which shall lie upon
him, omits to make or furnish in the prescribed form or manner or at or within the
prescribed time any plan, section return, notice, register; record or report required by or
under this Act to be made or furnished shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees.

67.

Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour Whoever, save as permitted by section 38, contravenes any provision of this Act or of
any regulation rule, bye-law or of any order made thereunder prohibiting retricting or regulating
the employment or presence of persons in or about a mine shall be punishable with imprisonment

for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
68.

Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen years of ageIf a person below eighteen years of age is employed in a mine in contravention of section
40, the owner, agent or manager of such mine shall be kpunishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.

69.

Failure to appoint manager Whoever, in contravention of the provisions of section 17, fails to appoint a manager shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with
fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees, or both.

70.

Notice of accidents :
(1) Whoever in contravention of the provision of sub-section (1) of section 23 fails to give
notice of any accidental occurrence or to post a copy of the notice on the special
notice board referred to in that sub-section and to keep in there for the period
specified shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupee or with both.
(2) Whoever in contravention of a direction made by the Central Government under subsection (3) falls to record in the prescribed register to give notice of any accidental
occurrence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months or with fine which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

71.

Owner etc. to report to Chief Inspector in certain casesWhere the owner, agent or manager of a mine, as the case may be, has taken
proceeding under this Act against any person employed in or about a mine in respect of
an offence under this Act, he shall within twenty-one days from the date of the
judgement or order of the court report the result thereof to the Chief Inspector.

72.

Obligations of persons employed in a mine –
No person employed in a mine shall -(a) willfully interfere with or misuse any appliance convenience of other thing provided in
a mine for the purpose of securing the health, safety or welfare of the person
employed therein.
(b) willfully and without reasonable cause do any thing likely to endanger himself of
others;
(c) willfully neglect to make us of any appliance or other thing provided in the mine for
the purpose of securing the health or safety of the persons employed therein.

72A.

Special provision for contravention of certain regulations Whoever contravenes any provision of any regulations or of any bye-law or any order
made thereunder, relating to matters specified in clauses (d),(I),(m),(n),(o),(p),(r), (s) and
(u) of section 7 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both.

72B.

Special provision of contravention of order under section 22.
Whoever continues to work a mine in contravention of any order issued under subsection (1A), sub-section (2) or sub-section(3) of section 22 or under sub-section (2) of
section 22 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two years and shall also be
liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the country to be
recorded in writing in the judgement of the court, such fine shall not be less than two
thousand rupees.

72C.

Special provision for contravention of law with dangerous results-

(1) Whoever contravenes any provision of the Act or of regulation, rule or bye-law or of
any order made under (1A) or sub-section (2) of section (3) of section 22 for under subsection (2) of section 22A shall be punishable (a) If such contravention results in loss of life, with imprisonment which may extend to
two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, or
(b) If such contravention results in serious bodily injury with imprisonment which may
extend to one years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with
both; or
(c) If such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to persons employed in the
mine or other persons in or about the mine, with imprisonment which may extend to
three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be
recorded in writing in the judgement of the court, such fine, in the case of a
contravention referred to in clause (a), shall not be less than three thousand rupees.
(2) Where a person having been convicted under this section is again convicted
thereunder, shall be punishable with double the punishment provided by sub-section (1).
(3) Any court imposing or confirming in appeal, revision or otherwise a sentence of fine
passed under this section may, when passing judgement, order the whole or any part of
the fine recovered to be paid as compensation to the person injured or, in the case of his
death, to his legal representative;
Provided that if the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal no such payment
shall be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed of, if an
appeal has been presented, before the decision of the appeal.
73.

General provision of disobedience of others.
Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye-laws or of
any order made thereunder for the contravention of which no penalty is herein before
provided shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

74.

Enhanced penalty after previous conviction If any person who has been convicted for an offence punishable under any of the
foregoing provisions (other than section 72B and 72C) is again convicted for an offence
committed within two years of the previous conviction and involving a contravention of the
same provision, he shall be punishable for each subsequent conviction with double the
punishment to which he would have been liable for the first contravention of such
provision.

75.

Prosecution of owner, agent or manager No prosecution shall be instituted against any owner, agent or manager for any offence
under this Act except at the instance of the Chief Inspector or of the District Magistrate or
of an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or special order in writing by the Chief
Inspector.
Provided that the Chief Inspector or the District Magistrate or the Inspector as so
authorised shall, before instituting such prosecution, satisfy himself that the owner, agent
or manager had failed to exercise all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
Provided further that in respect of an offence committed in the course of the technical
direction and management of a mine, the District Magistrate shall not institute any
prosecution against an owner, agent or manager without the approval of the Chief
Inspector.

76.

Determination of owner in certain cases -

Where the owner of a mine is firm or other association of individuals, all, or any of the
partners or members thereof or where the owner of a mine is a company; all or any of the
directors thereof where the owner of a mine is a Government or any local authority, as
the case may be, to manage the affair of the mine, may be prosecuted and punished
under this Act for any offence for which the owner of a mine is punishable:
Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notice in writing to the
Chief Inspector that it has nominated (a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners or managers:
(b) in the case of an association, any of its members or managers;
(c) in the case of a company any of its directors or managers.
Who is resident in each case in any place to which this act extends and who is in
each case either in fact in charge of the management or holds the largest number of
shares in such firm, association or company, to assume the responsibility of the
owner or the mine for the purposes of this Act, such partner, member, director or
manager, as the case may be, shall, so long as he continues to so reside and be in
charge or hold the largest number of shares as aforesaid, be deemed to be the
owner of the purposes of this Act unless a notice in writing canceling his nomination
or stating that he has ceased to be a partner, member, director or manager as the
case may be, is received by the Chief Inspector.
Explanation :- Where firm, association or company has different establishment or
branches or different units in any establishment or branch, different persons may be
nominated under this proviso in relation to different establishment or branches or
units and the person so nominated shall, with respect only to the establishment,
branch or unit in relation to which he has been nominated, deemed to be the owner
of the mine.
77.

Exemption of owner, agent or manager in certain cases Where the owner, agent or manager of a mine, accused of an offence under this Act,
alleges that another person is the actual offender, he shall be entitled, upon complaint
made by him in this behalf and on his furnishing the known address of the actual offender
and on giving to the prosecutor not less than three clear days notice in writing of his
intention to do so, to have that other persons brought before the court on the date
appointed for the hearing of the case; and if after the commission of the offence has been
proved, the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be proves to the
satisfaction of the court (a) that he has used due diligence to enforce the execution of the relevant provisions of
this act, and
(b) that the owner person committed the offence in question without his knowledge,
consent or connivance, the said other person shall be convicted of the offence and
shall be liable to the like punishment as if he were the owner, agent or manager of
the mine and the owner, agent or manager, as the case may be, shall be acquitted,
Provided that –
(a) the owner, agent or manager of the mine as the case may be, may be examined on
oath and his evidence and that of any witness who he calls in support shall be
subject to cross examination by or on behalf of the person he alleges as the actual
offender and by the prosecutor.
(b) If inspite of due diligence the person alleged as the, actual offender cannot be
brought before the court on the date appointed for the hearing of the case, the court
shall adjourn from the hearing thereof from time to time so however that the total
period of such adjournments does not exceed three months, and if by the end of the
said period the person alleged as the actual offender cannot be brought before the
court, the court shall proceed to hear the case against the owner, agent or manager
as the case may be.

78.

Power of court to make orders -

(1) Where the owner, agent or manager of mine is convicted of an offence punishable
under this act, the court may in addition to awarding him any punishment by order in
writing require him within a period specified in the order which may be extended by
the court from time to time on application made in this behalf to take such measures
as may be so specified for remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was
committed.
(2) Where an order is made under sub-section(1), the owner, agent or manager of the
mine, as the case may be, shall not be the liable under this Act in respect of the
continuance of the offence during the period or extended period, if any but if on the
expiry of such period or extended period the order of the court has not been fully
complied with the owner, agent or manager, as the case may be, shall be deemed to
have committed a further offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees for every day after such expiry on which the order has not been complied
with, or with both.
79.

Limitation of prosecutions No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, unless complaint thereof
has been made –
(i) within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed,
or
(ii) within six months of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to
the knowledge of the Inspector, or
(iia) In any case in which the accused is or was a public servant and previous sanction of
the Central Government or of the State Government or of any other authority is
necessary for taking cognizance of the offence under any law for the time being in force,
within three months of the date on which such sanction is received by the Chief
Inspector; or
(iii) in any case where a Court of inquiry has been appointed by the Central Government
under section 24, within one year after the date of the publication of the report referred to
in sub-section(4) of that section, whichever is later.
Explanation - For the purposes of this section –
(a) In the case of continuing offence, the period of limitation shall be computed with
reference to every point of time during which the offence continues,
(b) Where for the performance of any act time has been extended under this Act, the
period of limitation shall be computed from the expiry of the extended period.

80.

Cognizance of offences –
No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first
class shall try any offence under this Act which is alleged to have been committed by any
owner, agent or manager of a mine or any offence which is by this Act made punishable
with imprisonment.
80A.

81.

Reference to Committee in lieu of prosecution in certain cases (1) If the court trying any case instituted at the instance of the Chief Inspector or the
District Magistrate or of an Inspector under this Act is of opinion that the case is one
which should, in lieu of a prosecution, be referred to a Committee it may stay the
criminal proceedings and report the matter to the Central Government with a view to
such reference being made.
(2) On receipt of a report under sub-section(1) the Central Government may refer the
case to a Committee or may direct the court to proceed with the trial.
----------CHAPTER - X
MISCELLANEOUS

82.

Decision of question whether a mine is under this Act –
If any question arises as to whether any excavation or working or premises in or adjacent
to and belonging to a mine on which any process arcillary to the getting, dressing or
preparation for sale or minerals or of coke is being carried on in a mine within the
meaning of this Act, the Central Government may decide the question, and a certificate
signed by a Secretary to the Central Government shall be conclusive on the point.

83.

Power to exempt from operation of Act.
(1) The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, exempt either
absolutely or subject to any specified conditions any local area or any mine or group
or class of mines or any part of a mine or any class of persons from the operation of
all or any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations, rules or bye-laws;
Provided that no local area or mine or group or class of mines shall be exempted
from the provisions of section 40 and 45 unless it is also exempted from the
operation of all the other provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order and subject to such
restrictions as it may think fit to impose authorise the Chief Inspector or any other
authority to exempt, subject to any specified conditions, any mine or part thereof
from the operation of any of the provisions of the regulations, rules or bye-laws if the
Chief Inspector or such authority is of opinion that the conditions in any mine or part
thereof are such as to render compliance with such provision unnecessary or
impracticable.

84.

Power to alter on rescind any orders (1) The Central Government may reverse or modify any order passed under this Act.
(2) The Chief Inspector may for reasons to be recorded in writing, reverse or modify any
order passed by him under this Act or under any regulation, rule or bye-law.
(3) No order prejudicial to the owner, agent or manager of a mine shall be made under
this section unless such owner, agent or manager has been given a reasonable
opportunity of making representation.

85.

Application of Act to mines belonging to Government This Act shall also apply to mines belonging to the Government.

85A.

Persons required to give notice etc. legally bound to do so.
Every person required to give any notice or to furnish any information to any authority
under this Act shall be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 176 of the
Indian Penal Code. (Act 45 of 1860)

85B.

Signing of returns, notices etc. –
All returns and notices required to be furnished or given or communications sent by or on
behalf of the owner of a mine in connection with the provisions of this Act or any
regulation, rule, bye-law or any order made thereunder shall be signed by the owner,
agent or manager of the mine or by any person to whom power in this behalf has been
delegated by the owner by a power of attorney.

85C.

No fee or charge to be realised for facilities and conveniences No fee or charge shall be realised from any person employed in a mine in respect of any
protective arrangements or facilities to be provided, or any equipment or appliances to
be supplied under the provisions of this Act.

86.

Application of certain provision of Act 63 of 1948 to mines The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, direct that the
provisions of Chapter III and IV of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 if 1948) shall specified in
the notification apply to all mines and the precincts thereof.

87.

Protection of action taken in good faith No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding whatever shall lie against any person for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

88.
Repeal of Act 4 of 1923 Rep by the Repealing and Amending Act. 1959 (36 of 1957) S.2
and Sch.1.
Transitory provision –
(1) As from the date of constitution of the Committee under sub-section(1) of section 12
of the principal Act as amended by this Act –
(i) any Mining Board constituted under section 12 of the principal Act and functioning
as such on the aforesaid date shall stand dissolved;
(ii) the Chairman and members of any such Board, who on the aforesaid date are
members of that Mining Board shall cease to hold office as such;
(iii) all proceedings pending on the aforesaid date in any Mining Board shall stand
transferred to the said Committee which shall deal with them as if they had been
pending therein,
(2) Anything done or any action taken before the aforesaid date by any Mining Board
shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Principal Act as
amended by this Act be as valid and effective as if it had been done or taken by the
Committee.
--------------`

THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884
__________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
__________
SECTIONS
1.

Short title.
Local extent.

2.

Commencement.

3.

[Repealed.].

4.

Definitions.

5.

Power to make rules as to licensing of the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and
importation of explosives.

5A. Persons already in business in respect of certain explosives to carry on such business without
licence for a certain period.
6.

Power for Central Government to prohibit the manufacture, possession or importation of
specially dangerous explosives.

6A. Prohibition of manufacture, possession, sale or transport of explosives by young persons and
certain other persons.
6B.

Grant of licences.

6C. Refusal of licences.
6D. Licensing authority competent to impose conditions in addition to prescribed conditions.
6E.

Variation, suspension and revocation of licences.

6F.

Appeals.

7.

Power to make rules conferring powers of inspection, search, seizure, detention and removal.

8.

Notice of accidents.

9.

Inquiry into accidents.

9A. Inquiry into more serious accidents.
9B. Punishment for certain offences.
9C. Offences by companies.
10.

Forfeiture of explosives.

11.

Distress of aircraft or vessel.

12.

Abetment and attempts.

13.

Power to arrest without warrant persons committing dangerous offences.

14.

Saving and power to exempt.

15.

Saving of Arms Act, 1959.

16.

Saving as to liability under other law.

17.

Extension of definition of “explosive” to other explosive substances.

17A. Power to delegate.
18.

Procedure for making, publication and confirmation of rules.

1

THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884
ACT NO. 4 OF 18841
[26th February, 1884.]

An Act to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, 2 [transport, import and
export] of explosives.
WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, 2[transport, import and
export] of explosives; It is hereby enacted as follows:—
1. Short title.—(1) This Act may be called the 3*** Explosives Act, 1884; and
(2) Local extent.—It extends to whole India 4**
2. Commencement.—(1) This Act shall come into force on such day, 5as the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoints.
6

*

*

*

*

*

3. [Repeal of portions of Act 12 of 1875.] Rep. by the Indian Ports Act, 1889 (10 of 1889), s. 2
and the Second Schedule.
7

[4. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “aircraft” means any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions
of the air, other than the reactions of the air against the earth’s surface, and includes balloons, whether
fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying machines;
(b) “carriage” includes any carriage, wagon, cart, truck, vehicle or other means of conveying
goods or passengers by land, in whatever manner the same may be propelled,
(c) “District Magistrate”, in relation to any area for which a Commissioner of Police has been
appointed, means the Commissioner of Police thereof and includes—
(a) any such Deputy Commissioner of Police, exercising jurisdiction over the whole or any
part of such area, as may be specified by the State Government in this behalf in relation to such
area or part: and
(b) an Additional District Magistrate;
(d) “explosive” means gunpowder, nitoglycerine, nitroglycol, gun-cotton, di-nitro-toluene,
tri-nitro-toluene, picric acid, di-nitro-phenol, tri-nitro-resorcinol (styphnic acid), cyclo-trime-

1. This Act has been declared, under s. 3 (a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in
the Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now called the Ranchi District—see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt, I, p.44)
Palamau and Manbhum and in Pargana Dhalbhum and the K.olhan in the Singhbhum District of the Chota
Nagpur Division—See Gazette of India, 1896, Pt. I.p. 972.
It has been applied to the Sonthal Parganas under s. 3 of the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation (3 of 1872),
as amended by the Sonthal Parganas Laws Regulation, 1886 (3 of 1886), and by s. 3 of Regulation 3 of 1899, and
to Porahat Estate by Bihar Regulation (2 of 1946).
For the law relating to explosive substances, see also the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (6 of 1908).
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch.,
extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-7-1965)
and to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-10-1967).
The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1-10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I.
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 2, for “transport and importation” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
3. The word “Indian” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-3-1983).
4. The words and letter “except Part B States” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule
(w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
5. 1st July, 1887—see Gazette of India, 1887, Pt. I, p. 307
6. Sub-section (2) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Schedule.
7. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 4, for section 4 (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

2

thylene-trinitramine, penta-erythritol-tetranitrate, tetryl, nitro-guanidine, leadazide, lead
styphynate, fulminate of mercury or any other metal, diazo-di-nitro-phenol, coloured fires
or any other substance whether a single chemical compound or a mixture of substances,
whether solid or liquid or gaseous used or manufactured with a view to produce a practical
effect by explosion or pyrotechnic effect; and includes fog-signals, fireworks, fuses,
rockets, percussion-caps, detonators, cartidgcs, ammunition of all descriptions and every
adaptation or preparation of an explosive as defined in this clause;
(e) “export” means taking out of India to a place outside India by land, sea or air;
(f) “import” means to bring into India from a place outside India by land, sea or air;
(g) “master”,—
(a) in relation to any vessel or aircraft means any person, other than a pilot, harbour
master, assistant harbour master or berthing master, having for the time being the
charge or control of such vessel or aircraft, as the ease may be; and
(b) in relation to any boat belonging to a ship, means the master of that ship;
(h) “manufacture” in relation to an explosive includes the process of—
(1) dividing the explosive into its component parts or otherwise breaking up or
unmaking the explosive, or making fit for use any damaged explosive; and
(2) re-making, altering or repairing the explosive;
(i) “prescribed - means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “vessel” includes any ship, boat, sailing vessel, or other description of vessel used in
navigation whether propelled by oars or otherwise and anything made for the conveyance,
mainly by water, of human beings or of goods and a caisson.]
5. Power to make rules as to licensing of the manufacture, possession, use, sale,
transport, import and export of explosives.—(1) The Central Government may, for any part
of 1[India], 2*** make rules consistent with this Act to regulate or prohibit, except under and in
accordance with the conditions of a licence granted as provided by those rules, the manufacture,
possession, use, sale. 3 [transport, import and export] of explosives, or any specified class of
explosives.
(2) Rules under this section may provide for all or any of the following, among other matters, that is
to say:—
(a) the authority by which licenses may be granted;
(b) the fees to be charged for licenses, and the other sums (if any) to be paid for expenses by
applicants for licenses:
(c) the manner in which applications for licenses must be made, and the matters to be specified
in such applications:
(d) the form in which, and the conditions on and subject to which, licenses must be
granted;
( e ) t h e p e r i o d f o r w h i c h l i c e n s e s a r e t o r e m a i n i n f o r c e ; 4* * *
5

[(ee) the authority to which appeals may be preferred under section 6F, the procedure to
be followed by such authority and the period within which appeals shall be preferred, the fees
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Schedule, for “Part A States and Part C States” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
2. The words “and each Local Government, with the previous sanction of the Governor, General in Council, may for any part of
the territories wider its administration” omitted by the A.O. 1937.
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 5, for “transport and importation” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
4. The word “and” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
5. Ins. b y s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

3

to be paid in respect of such appeals and the circumstances under which such fees may be
refunded:
(eea) the total quantity of explosives that a licensee can purchase in a given period of
time;
(eeb) the fees to be charged by the Chief Controller of Explosives or any officer authorised by
him in this behalf, for services rendered in connection with the manufacture, transport, import or
export of explosives;]
(f) the exemption absolutely or subject to conditions of any explosives 1[or any person or class of
persons] from the operation of the rules.
2

*

*

*

*

*

3

[5A. Persons already in business in respect of certain explosives to carry on such business
without licence for a certain period.—Notwithstanding anything in section 5 or in the rules made
thereunder where, immediately before the commencement of the Indian Explosives (Amendment)
Act, 1978 (32 of 1978), any person was carrying on the business of manufacture, sale, transport,
import or export of any explosive (for which no licence was required under this Act before its
amendment by the Indian Explosives (Amendment) Act, 1978, then, such person shall be entitled
to continue to carry on such business without licence in respect of such explosive—
(a) for a period of three months from the date of such commencement; or
(b) if before the expiry of the said period of three months, such person has made an application
for grant of licence under this Act for such business in such explosive, until the final disposal of his
application,
whichever is later.]
6. Power for Central Government to prohibit the. manufacture, possession or importation of
specially dangerous explosives.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the rules under the last foregoing
section, the Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette,—
(a) prohibit, either absolutely or subject to conditions, the manufacture, possession or
importation of any explosive which is of so dangerous a character that, in the opinion of the
Central Government, it is expedient for the public safety to issue the notification. 4***.
5

*

*

*

*

*

6

[(2) The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) shall have effect in relation to any explosive with
regard to the importation of which a notification has been issued under this section and the vessel,
carriage or aircraft containing such explosive as that Act has in relation to any article the
importance of which is prohibited or regulated thereunder and the vessel, carriage or aircraft
containing such article.
7

*

*

*

*

8

*

[6A. Prohibition of manufacture, possession, sale or transport of explosives by young persons and
certain other persons.—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Act,—
(a) no person,—
(i) who has not completed the age of eighteen years, or
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
2. Sub-section (3) omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
4. The word “and” and cl. (b)rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.

5. Clause (b) rep. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid.
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 7, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
7. Sub-section (3) omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

4

(ii) who has been sentenced on conviction of any offence involving violence or moral
turpitude for a term not less than six months, at any time during a period of five years after the
expiration of the sentence, or
(iii) who has been ordered to execute under Chapter VIII of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) a bond for keeping the peace or for good
behaviour, at any time during the term of the bond., or
(iv) whose licence under this Act has been cancelled, whether before Or after the
commencement of the Indian Explosives (Amendment) Act, 1978 (32 of 1978), for
contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, at any time
during a period of five years from the date of cancellation of such licence, shall,—
(1) manufacture, sell, .transport, import or export any explosive, or
(2) possess any such explosive as the Central Government may, having regard to
the nature thereof, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify;
(b) no person shall sell, deliver or despatch any explosive to a person whom he knows
or has reason to believe at the time of such sale, delivery or despatch,—
(i) to be prohibited under clause (a)to manufacture, sell, transport, import, export or possess
such explosive, or
(ii) to be of unsound mind.
6B. Grant of licences.—(1) Where a person makes an application for licence under
section 5, the authority prescribed in the rules made under that section for grant of licences
(hereinafter referred to in this Act as the licensing authority), after making such inquiry, if any,
as it may consider necessary, shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, by order in writing
either grant the licence or refuse to grant the same.
(2) The licensing authority shall grant a licence—
(a) where it is required for the purpose of manufacture. of explosives if the licensing
authority is satisfied that the person by whom license is required—
(i) possesses technical know-how and experience in the manufacture of explosives;
or
(ii) has in his employment or undertakes to employ a person or persons possessing such
technical know-how and experience; or
(b) where it is required for any other purpose, if the licensing authority is satisfied that the person
by whom licence is required has a good reason for obtaining the same.
6C. Refusal of licences.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6B, the licensing
authority shall refuse to grant a licence—
(a) where such licence is required in respect of any prohibited explosive; or
(b) where such licence is required by a person whom the licensing authority has reason to
believe—
(i) to be prohibited by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force to
manufacture, possess, sell, transport import or export any explosive, or
(ii) to be of unsound mind, or
(iii) to be for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; or
(c) where the licensing authority deems it necessary for the security of the public peace or for
public safety to refuse to grant such licence.

5

(2)Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence to any person it shall record in
writing the reasons for such refusal and furnish to that person on demand a brief statement of the
same unless in any case the licensing authority is of opinion that it will not be in the public
interest to furnish such statement.
6D. Licensing authority competent to impose conditions in addition to prescribed
conditions.—A licence granted under section 6B may contain in addition to prescribed
conditions such other conditions as may be considered necessary by the licensing authority in
any particular case.
6E. Variation, suspension and revocation of licences.—(1) The licensing authority may vary the
conditions subject to which a licence has been granted except such of them as have been prescribed and
may for that purpose require the holder of licence by notice in writing to deliver-up the licence to it within
such time as may be specified in the notice.
(2)The licensing authority may, on the application of the holder of a licence, also vary the conditions
of the licence except such of them as have been prescribed.
(3) The licensing authority may, by order in writing, suspend a licence for such period as it thinks fit
or revoke a licence,—
(a) if the licensing authority is satisfied that the holder of the licence is prohibited by this Act or
by any other law for the time being in force to manufacture, possess, sell, transport, import or export
any explosive, or is of unsound mind, or is for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; ot
(b) if the licensing authority deems it necessary for the security of the public peace or for public
safety to suspend or revoke the licence; or
(c) if the licence was obtained by the suppression of material information or on the basis of
wrong information provided by the holder of the licence or any other person on his behalf at the time
of applying for the licence; or
(d) if any of the conditions of the licence has been contravened; or
(e) if the holder of the licence has failed to comply with a notice under sub-section (1) requiring
him to deliver-up the licence.
(4) The licensing authority may also revoke a licence on the application of the holder thereof.
(5) where the licensing authority makes an order varying the conditions of a licence under sub-section
(1) or an order suspending or revoking a licence under sub-section (3), it shall record in writing the
reasons therefor and furnish to the holder of the licence on demand a brief statement of the same unless in
any case the licensing authority is of the opinion that it will not be in the public interest to furnish such
statement.
(6) A court convicting the holder of a licence of any offence under this Act or the rules made
thereunder may also suspend or revoke a licence:
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the suspension or revocation shall
become void.
(7) An order of suspension or revocation under sub-section (6) may also be made by an appellate
court or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision.
(8) The Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, suspend or revoke, or direct any
licensing authority to suspend or revoke, all or any licences granted under this .Act throughout India or
any part thereof.
(9) On the suspension or revocation of a licence under this section the holder thereof shall without
delay surrender the licence to the authority by whom it has been suspended or revoked or to such other
authority as may be specified in this behalf in the order of suspension or revocation.
6F. Appeals.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the licensing authority refusing to grant a
licence or varying the conditions of a licence or by an order of the licensing authority suspending or
6

revoking a licence may prefer an appeal against that order to such authority (hereinafter referred to as the
appellate authority) and within such period as may be prescribed:
Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order made by, or under the direction of, the Central
Government.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within
that period.
(3) The period prescribed for an appeal shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of the
Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), with respect to the computation of periods of limitation thereunder.
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be
accompanied by a brief statement of the reasons for the order appealed agianst where such
statement has been furnished to the appellant and by such fee as may be prescribed.
(5) In disposing of an appeal the appellate authority shall follow such procedure as may be
prescribed:
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(6) The order appealed against shall, unless the appellate authority conditionally or
unconditionally directs otherwise, be in force pending the disposal of the appeal against such order.
(7) Every order of the appellate authority confirming, modifying or reversing the order appealed
against shall be final.]
7. Power to make rules conferring powers of inspection, search, seizure, detention and
removal.—(1) The Central Government 1*** may make rules consistent with this Act authorising any
officer, either by name or in virtue of his office.—
(a) to enter, inspect and examine 2 [any place, aircraft, carriage or vessel] in which an
explosive is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, 3 [transported, imported or exported]
under a license granted under this Act, or in which he has reason to believe that an explosive has
been or is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, 3[transported, imported or exported] in
contravention of this Act or of the rules made under this Act;
(b) to search for explosives therein;
(c) to take samples of any explosive found therein on payment of the value thereof; a n d
4

[(d) to seize, detain and remove any explosive or ingredient thereof found therein and, if
necessary, also destroy such explosive or ingredient.]
(2) The provisions of the 5[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] relating to searches under
that Code shall, so far as the same are applicable, apply to searches by officers authorised by rules under
this section.
8. Notice of accidents.—6[(1)] Whenever there occurs in or about, or in connection with, any
place in which an explosive is manufactured, possessed or used, or 7[any aircraft, carriage or vessel]
either conveying an explosive or on or from which an explosive is being loaded or unloaded, any
accident by explosion or by fire attended with loss of human life or serious injury to person or
1. The words “or the Local Government with the previous sanction of the Governor-General in Council” omitted by the A.O.
1937.
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 9, for “any place, carriage or vessel” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “transported or imported” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause(d) (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure (10 of 1882)” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
6. Section 8 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by 18 of 1945, s. 2.
7. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 10, for “any carriage or vessel” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

7

property, or of a description usually attended with such loss or injury, the occupier of the place, or
1
[the master of the aircraft or vessel], or the person in charge of the carriage, as the case may be, shall
2
[within such time and in such manner as may be by rule prescribed give notice thereof and of the
attendant loss of human life or personal injury, if any, to the 3[Chief Controller of Explosives] and] to the
officer in charge of the nearest police-station.
4

*

*

*

*

*

5

[9. Inquiry into accidents.—(1) Where any accident such as is referred to in section 8 occurs
in or about or in connection with 6[any place, aircraft, carriage or vessel] under the control of any
of 7[Armed Forces of the Union], an inquiry into the causes of the accident shall be held by the
naval, military, or air force authority concerned, and where any such accident occurs in any other
circumstances, the District Magistrate 8* * * shall, in cases attended by loss of human life, or may,
in any other case, hold or direct a Magistrate subordinate to him to hold, such an Inquiry..
(2) Any person holding an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a Magistrate in
holding an inquiry into an offence under the 9[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], and
may exercise such of the powers conferred on any officer by rules under section 7 as he may think it
necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes of the inquiry.
(3) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the Central Government
stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances.
(4) The Central Government may make rules—
(a) to regulate the procedure at inquiries under this section;
(b) to enable the 10 [Chief Controller of Explosives] to be present or represented at any such
inquiry;
(c) to permit the 10[Chief Controller of Explosives] or his representative to examine any
witnesses at the inquiry;
(d) to provide that where the 10[Chief Controller of Explosives] is not present or represented at
any such inquiry, a report of the proceedings thereof shall be sent to him;
(e) to prescribe the manner in which and the time within which notices referred to in section 8
shall be given.
9A. Inquiry into more serious accidents.—(1) The Central Government may, where it is of
opinion, whether or not it has received the report of an inquiry under section 9, that an inquiry or more
formal character should be held into the causes of an accident such as is referred to in section 8, appoint
the 11[Chief Controller of Explosives] or any other competent person to hold such inquiry, and may also
appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special knowledge to act as assessors in such inquiry.
(2) Where the Central Government orders an inquiry under this section, it may also direct that any
inquiry under section 9 pending at the time shall be discontinued.
(3) The person appointed to hold an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a Civil
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purposes of enforcing the
attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents and material objects; and every
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 10, for “the master of vessel” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
2. Subs. by 18 of 1945, s. 2, for “forthwith give notice thereof”.
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 10, for “Chief Inspector of Explosives in India” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
4. Sub-section (2) omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
5. Subs. by 18 of 1945, s. 3, for section 9.
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 11, for “any place, carriage or vessel” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
7. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “the Indian Forces” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
8. The brackets and words “(or in a Presidency-town, the Commissioner of Police)” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-31983).
9. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
10. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “Chief Inspector of Explosives in India” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
11. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “Chief Inspector of Explosives in India” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

8

person required by such person as aforesaid to furnish any information shall be deemed to be legally
bound so to do within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1890).
(4) Any person holding an inquiry under this section may exercise such of the powers conferred on
any officer by rules under section 7 as he may think it necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes
of the inquiry.
(5) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the Central
Government stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances, and adding any observations
which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make; and the Central Government shall cause
every report so made to be published at such time and in such manner as it may think fit.
(6) The Central Government may make rules for regulating the procedure at inquiries under this
section]
1

[9B. Punishment for certain offences.—(1) Whoever, in contravention of rules made under
section 5 or of the conditions of a licence granted under the said rules—
(a) manufactures, imports or exports any explosive shall he punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both;
(b) possesses, uses, sells or transports any explosive shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees or with
both; and
(c) in any other case, with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever in contravention of a notification issued under section 6 manufactures, possesses or
imports any explosive shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both; and in the case of
importation by water, the owner and master of the vessel or in the ease of importation by air, the
owner, and the master of the aircraft, in which the explosive is imported shall, in the absence of
reasonable excuse, each be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
(3) Whoever,—
(a) manufactures, sells, transports, imports, exports or possesses any explosive in contravention
of the provisions of clause (a) of section 6A; or
(b) sells, delivers or despatches any explosive in contravention of the provisions of clause (b) of
that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine or with both; or
(c) in contravention of the provisions of section 8 fails to give notice of any accident shall be
punishable,—
(i) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
(ii) if the accident is attended by loss of human life, with-imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months or with fine or with both.
9C. Offences by companies.—(1) Whenever an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible
t6 the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 13.

9

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means anybody corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, Means a partner in the firm.]
10. Forfeiture of explosives.—When a person is convicted of an offence punishable under this Act,
or the rules made under this Act, the court before which he is convicted may direct that the explosive, or
ingredient of the explosive, or the substance (if any) in respect of which the offence has been committed,
or any part of that explosive, ingredient or substance, shall, with the receptacles containing the same, be
forfeited.
1

[11. Distress of aircraft or vessel.—Where the owner or Master of any aircraft or vessel is
adjudged under this Act to pay a fine for any offence committed with, or in relation to, that
aircraft or vessel, the. Court may, in addition to any power it may have for the purpose of
compelling payment of the fine, direct it to be levied by distress and sale of,—
(a) the aircraft and its furniture or so much of the furniture, or
(b) the vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture of such vessel or so much of the tackle,
apparel and furniture thereof,
as is necessary for the payment of the fine.]
12. Abetment and attempts.—Whoever abets, within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), the commission of an offence punishable under this Act, or the rules made under this Act, or
attempts to commit any such offence and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the
same, shall be punished as if he had committed the offence.
13. Power to arrest without warrant persons committing dangerous offences.—Whoever is
found committing any act for which he is punishable under this Act or the rules under this Act, and
which tends to cause explosion or fire in or about any place where an explosive is manufactured or
stored, or any railway or port, or any carriage, 2[aircraft or vessel], may be apprehended without a
warrant by a Police-officer, or by the occupier of, or the agent or servant of, or other person
authorized by the occupier of, that place, or by any agent or servant of, or other person authorized
by, the railway administration or 3[conservator of the port or officer in charge of the air port], and
be removed from the place where he is arrested and conveyed as soon as conveniently may be
before a Magistrate.
4

[14. Saving and power to exempt.—(1) Nothing in this Act, except sections 8,9 and 9A shall apply
to the manufacture, possession, use, transport or importation of any explosive—
(a) by any of the 5[Armed Forces of the Union, and ordnance factories or other establishments of
such Forces) in accordance with rules or regulations made by 6***the Central Government;
(b) by any person employed under 7[the Central Government or under a State Government] in
execution of this Act.
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 14, for s. 11 (w.e.f.2-3-1983).
2. Subs. by s, 15, ibid., for “ship or boat” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
3 . Su b s. b y s. 1 5 , ib id ., fo r “c o n servato r o f th e p o rt” (w. e.f. 2 -3 -1 9 8 3 ).
4. Subs. by 18 of 1945, s. 4, for section 14.
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 16, for “Indian Forces” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
6. The words “His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom or” omitted by the A.O. 1950.
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “any Government in British India”.

10

(2) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette exempt, absolutely or subject
to any such conditions as it may think fit to impose, 1 [any explosive and any person or cl ass of
per s ons f r om al l or any of t he pr ovi s i ons of t hi s Act or t he r ul es made t her eunder .]
15. Saving of Arms Act, 1959.—Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of
the 2[Arms Act, 1959 (4 of 1959)]:
Provided that an authority granting a license under this Act for the manufacture,
possession, sale, transport or importation of an explosive may, if empowered in this
behalf by the rules under which the license is granted, direct by an order written on the
license that it shall have the effect of a like license granted under the said 3*** Arms
(4 of 1959) Act, 1959.
16. Saving as to liability under other law.—Nothing in this Act or the rules under
this Act shall prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for any
act or omission which constitutes an offence against this Act or those rules, or from
being liable under that other law to any other or higher punishment or penalty than that
provided by this Act or those rules:
Provided that a person shall not be punished twice for the same offence.
17. Extension of definition of “explosive” to other explosive substances.—The
Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare that any substance which appears to the Central Government to be specially
dangerous to life or property, by reason either of its explosive properties or of any
process in the manufacture thereof being liable to explosion, shall be deemed to be an
explosive within the meaning of this Act; and the provisions of this Act (subject to such
exceptions, limitations and restrictions as may be specified in the notification) shall
accordingly extend to that substance in like manner as if it were included in the
definition of the term “explosive” in this Act.
4

[17A. Power to delegate.—The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that any power or function which may be exercised or
performed by it under this Act other than the power under sections 5, 6, 6A, 14 and 17
may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may
specify in the notification, be exercised or performed also by—
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to the State
Government.]
18. Procedure for making, publication and confirmation of rules.—(1) An
authority making rules under this Act shall before making the rules, publish a draft of
the proposed rules for the information of persons likely to be affected thereby.
(2) The publication shall be made in such manner as the Central Government, from
time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette prescribes.
(3) There shall be published with the draft a notice specifying a date at or after
which the draft will be taken into consideration.
(4) The authority making the rules shall receive and consider any objection or
suggestion which may be made by any person with respect to the draft before the date
so specified.

1. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 16, for certain words (w.e.f. 2-2-1983).
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “Indian Arms Act, 1878” (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
3. The word “Indian” omitted by s. 17, ibid., (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).
4. Ins by s. 18, ibid.(w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

11

( 5) A rule made under this Act s hall not t ake effect 1 *** until it has been
publi shed i n the Offici al Gazett e 2***
( 6) T he publ i cat i on i n t he Of fi ci al Gazet t e of a r ul e pur por ti ng t o be made under
this Act shall be conclusive evidence that it has been duly made, and, if it, requires sanction, that it has
been duly sanctioned.
(7) All powers to make rules conferred by this Act may he exercised from time to time as
occasion requires.
3

[(8) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.]

1. The words “if it is made by the Governor-General in Council” omitted by the A.O.1937.
2. The words “and if it is made by the Local Government until it has been published in the local Official
Gazette” omitted, ibid.
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 19 (w.e.f. 2-3-1983).

12

